## INTRODUCTION

growth. For instance, Prime Minister Hosokawa's initiative to form a committee to produce a 1990s version of the Maekawa Report, $^{12}$ as well as his emphasis on the need for 'economic reforms', indicated that the government has decided that long-term growth must rely more on domestic demand, which requires deregulated and open markets. Despite his emphasis on such reforms, however, Hosokawa's short-lived government achieved little to deregulate the economy. While the succeeding governments, led by Hata and Murayama, have upheld the goal of deregulation, these two governments have not done anything significant - in terms of both scope and duration - partially because of the current political turmoil.

The final change in the global economic setting is the acceleration of regional economic integration. While global multilateralism stagnated during seemingly endless GATT Uruguay Round negotiations, industrialized nations moved toward regional cooperation of their economies. Even with the conclusion of the Round, it is uncertain whether the ultimate goal of GATT, namely global free trade, will be attained. The European Union is emerging as one economic unit, as members of the EU are making solid efforts to remove barriers to any type of economic transaction within the region. In addition, the size of the EU market will increase over the next decade due to the ongoing process of enlargement.

Another effort to create a continent-wide market is seen in North America. Although the Clinton government faced strong opposition from labour unions and some environmentalists, the US Congress approved NAFTA in November 1993. However, the scope of integration created by NAFTA will be much less than what the Maastricht Treaty envisions for the EU. Most importantly, NAFTA does not aim at eventual political integration as the EU does. In addition, NAFTA is not a tariff union and thus each government reserves the authority to adjust tariffs against extra-regional trade. Furthermore, because of the deep concern for loss of employment in the US, the integration of the North American economy will not proceed to include provisions to allow the free movement of labour across borders.

The point of concern here is not whether it is possible for Europe and America to become completely integrated economies, though. What is relevant is how regional integration affects the choices faced by Japan's foreign economic policymakers. It is unclear to what extent regional integration will have a negative impact on the global free trade system. To our relief, the current rise of regionalism is of a different nature from that of the 1930s. The memory of protectionism and the rise of bloc economies in the 1930s, which might have been a contributing factor to the Second World War, is still present in the minds of the policymakers of the industrialized world. This collective memory serves to support the norm

## INTRODUCTION

of free trade held by the Western nations. Thus, the current rise of regionalism should not be mistaken for a recurrence of the 1930s.

While the current regional integration may not signify a rise of protectionism, regional integration will have both 'trade-creative' and 'trade-divertive' effects. $^{13}$ The trade-creative effect is the increase of trade from reduction of intra-regional trade barriers and promotion of uniformity of product standards and regulations. However, there will be a trade-divertive effect. Regional integration will raise the relative cost of extra-regional trade for local companies by offering opportunities for economy of scale for businesses done within the region. Also, intra-regional trade will increase relative to extra-regional trade because of the reduced transaction costs among companies within the region.

However, non-member states are most worried about the protectionist measures these regions may adopt against external trade. GATT prohibited raising extra-regional trade barriers, both tariffs and quantitative restrictions, in cases of regional integration. However, there were measures that either 'bypass GATT's rule of law', such as voluntary export restraints, or 'those that "capture" and pervert it' such as the imposition of countervailing duties and the use of anti-dumping provisions. $^{14}$

Even after the establishment of a more comprehensive international trade organization, the World Trade Organization (WTO), in January 1995, unilateral measures against 'unfair' trade seem to persist. The problem is the lack of effective multilateral means to prevent the use of such measures. The unilateral measure announced by the US government on 16 May 1995 in retaliation for the failed US-Japan talks on automobile parts exemplifies the weakness of the WTO.

Moreover, trade policymakers, the lawyers specializing in GATT laws in particular, can always find a legal loophole. The agreement between an American and Japanese firm on Japan's cellular phone market is a case in point. Under heavy pressure, Motorola and IDO (Nippon Idó Tsūshin) agreed to expand Motorola's market access in March 1994. While the agreement is similar to a Voluntary Import Expansion (VIE), not a VER, the Motorola-IDO formula between private firms, rather than governments, signifies the possibility of a virtual market share agreement without the appearance of a VER agreement. $^{15}$ Thus, because there are many possibilities of legal loopholes in the Uruguay Round agreements and the WTO, it is still possible that a regional free trade zone will become more protectionist, if external trade increases to the point of threatening industries of member nations (the recent increase in the number of antidumping cases within the EU suggests that this possibility is real).

Japan has three options in response to emerging regional arrangements: do nothing, create an exclusive regional arrangement with its Asian neighbours, or increase its openness, either unilaterally or within a multilateral form such as Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). (Notice that

## INTRODUCTION

increased protection is not an option. As a result of rounds of multilateral trade talks, Japanese policymakers do not consider raising protection as a legitimate trade policy.) The choice Japan will make will have a deep impact on both the Japanese economy and Japan's political power in global affairs.

Because of the sheer size of the EU and NAFTA markets - over six trillion dollars each in terms of GDP - Japan has a large stake in keeping these markets open. Because the first two choices may produce adverse results such as adoption of retaliatory measures by the members of the EU and/or NAFTA or increased pressure for managed trade, it is rational for Japan to choose the third option, that is, to increase its openness.

No nation closes its market to imports without a clear reason. This reluctance is due to widespread awareness among industrialized nations of the cost of protectionism. Yet, if Japan decides either to create its own regional trading bloc and exclude non-Asian trading partners or 'do nothing' and continues to record large trade surpluses, two options are available to Japan's (non-Asian) trading partners.

They may decide to demand that the share of their exports in the Japanese market increases. This option has already been tried in the US-Japan semiconductor negotiations held in the mid-1980s and more recently in the US-Japanese talks on automobile parts. A variation of this approach was seen in the aforementioned Motorola-IDO agreement, and is likely to be adopted in more sectors in the near future. The reasons are quite clear. If the Japanese market is closed to newcomer firms and does not have free market competition, it means that the Japanese observe 'managed trade' at home. If the Japanese observe 'managed trade' at home, then it is hard for Japanese officials to criticize their trading partners' demand that the Japanese government should agree on market shares with foreign governments. Therefore, as the case of semiconductor negotiations indicates, no matter how much Japan resists the idea of 'managed trade', Japan can do little but acquiesce to the demand for higher market shares.

Or, Japan's trading partners, the US in particular, may increase the use of retaliation threats. Even though retaliatory measures are seldom adopted, Japan needs to avoid this scenario because exporting firms' production plans are seriously affected by such threats. However, as long as Japan keeps its markets closed, Japan will have little political leverage over its trading partners to change their policies. As the experience of the US and its leadership in creating GATT and the postwar world free trade system indicates, unless Japan lifts barriers to foreign exports, it has no legitimate claim over other governments to do the same.

The reasons why Japan is vulnerable to decisions made by its trading partners are multifold. As we will see in the next chapter, hegemonic power, international regimes, and market dependence explain partially

## INTRODUCTION

why Japan must yield to foreign pressure. However, the bottom line of all these three reasons is that thanks to the prevalence of GATT norms in the postwar period, liberal trade policy has become the universal norm. Thus, if any country practises trade policy that differs from this norm, be it high trade barriers or tight regulations, the country has very little legitimacy in claiming that its policy must persist. Thus, today's trade negotiations between Japan and other nations tend to give less political leverage to Japan than to its trading partners.

## ABOUT THE MOSS TALKS

So far, we have looked at the need for Japan to liberalize its markets in the light of Japan's relations with the global economy. However in the following chapters, we will focus primarily on US-Japan economic relations. To be sure, over the last decade, Japan's economic ties with other nations, Asian neighbours in particular, have been strengthened, in part due to the rising yen. However, I am focusing on the bilateral relations because for Japan, its relations with the US have been by far the most important, both economically and politically, since the end of the Second World War and they continue to be so today.

The cases I use in the following chapters all appeared in the set of US-Japan trade negotiations called the Market-Oriented Sector-Selective (MOSS) talks which took place between 1985 and 1986. The MOSS talks were initiated after several series of trade negotiations to control Japanese exports which served but little to reduce the US trade deficit with Japan. The US decided to shift its focus from imports from Japan to American exports to Japan and launched a new type of trade negotiation aimed at a thorough removal of all the governmental trade barriers in selected sectors.

The MOSS talks were initiated at the Reagan-Nakasone meeting on 2 January 1985. In this book, I will deal with the four sectors, namely, telecommunications, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and forest products that were the original MOSS-negotiated issues. $^{16}$ The method of focusing on one sector and aiming at removing all barriers to trade was modelled after the 1984 US-Japan Yen-Dollar agreement, which, in the opinion of at least part of the US government, 'contributed to the liberalization of Japanese financial markets'. $^{17}$ The MOSS talks were concluded on 8 January 1986. The outcome of the talks varied from one sector to another. While most of the issues in the talks on telecommunications and pharmaceuticals were resolved by 8 January, the talks on electronics and forest products did not produce the outcomes expected by the US negotiators. (For a detailed account of the talks' progress, please see appendices at the end of this book.)

There are several reasons why I chose cases from the MOSS talks. The

first and most important reason is that the MOSS talks marked a significant shift of US trade policy toward Japan as I mentioned earlier, which in turn changed Japan's foreign economic policy agenda. Since the early 1970s, when the US bilateral trade deficit with Japan became rather sizeable, the US had pressured Japan to reduce its trade surpluses through a correction of its export strategy to the US (except for agricultural trade in which Japan restricted imports of products such as beef, oranges and rice). However, as the steel and automobile voluntary export restraint agreements indicate (first negotiated in 1977 and 1980, respectively), the attempt to control Japanese exports had limited effects on the US trade deficit with Japan. Having experienced frustration over such failures, the US shifted its focus from imports from Japan to American exports to Japan. MOSS was adopted in order to remove all the governmental trade barriers in selected sectors. Thus, removal of barriers to exports in Japan began with the MOSS talks. These talks laid the ground for following trade negotiations, such as the Structural Impediment Initiative of 1989-90 and the Framework talks, starting in 1993.

The MOSS-type trade negotiation signalled a shift in American trade policy. Contrary to the idea that the US is becoming increasingly protectionist, the fact that it has chosen to pursue open overseas markets (instead of unilaterally closing its own markets) indicates that the US is still upholding the principles of free trade. It is true that the recent tendency for the American government to insist on 'qualitative and quantitative indicators of success' for market access signifies a deviation away from free trade principles. A full examination of the topic is outside the scope of this book, but we must bear in mind that managed trade has not become the primary norm for the American government, as seen in its effort to establish NAFTA and push the Uruguay Round to conclusion. The US' use of rhetoric that at times sounds consistent with 'managed trade' is mostly a response to Japanese markets, which do not seem to operate in the same way as other overseas markets.

Another reason for examining the MOSS talks is that the MOSS cases represent a counter-intuitive case of market liberalization. The dominant explanation of Japanese trade policy, that is, mercantilism, tells us that a government will not liberalize markets for non-competitive products. $^{18}$ According to this theory, several of the sectors negotiated under the MOSS talks were 'most-likely' to receive continued protection and therefore 'least-likely' to be liberalized. $^{19}$ However, as a result of the talks, most sectors, if not all, were liberalized. Thus, the cases of the MOSS talks represent 'crucial' cases to reassess the theory that Japanese trade policy is mercantilist.

Additional reason is that the MOSS talks offer a set of cases for meaningful comparison with one another. They are similar in that, as mentioned above, all requests for liberalization were expected to meet

continued protectionism. They are also similar in that US pressure produced some response by the Japanese government. They are different, and hence interesting, in that outcomes varied across issues. This combination of similarities and differences shows clearly the impact of independent or intervening variables, such as bureaucratic policymaking mechanisms.

If international pressure was the independent variable that explains overall Japanese willingness to accept market liberalization in the MOSS talks, two facts suggest the existence of intervening variables. (Some might think policy changes made during the MOSS talks were due to the rise of the yen. Exchange rate fluctuations are not studied in this book because the rapid rise of the yen did not occur until after the Plaza Accord reached in September 1985. Moreover, interviews suggested that the perceptions and decisions of trade policymakers and private sector representatives involved in the talks were not affected by the exchange rate changes.) First, the initial level of market closure had little to do with Japan's responsiveness. In other words, we cannot conclude that Japan was responsive in sectors which were already relatively open. The US exported relatively more pharmaceuticals to Japan (measured as the ratio of exports to Japan to exports to the world) than it did other products. The other sectors in the MOSS talks did not show equally high export ratios (Table 1.1). However, in telecommunications, for instance, Japan showed high responsiveness despite a relatively closed market.

Another fact is that the amount of pressure applied to Japan did not correlate with Japan's responsiveness. For instance, the US showed stronger interest and thus pressed harder in the talks on forest products and telecommunications than in the talks on pharmaceuticals and electronics. However, high pressure in the case of forest products did not yield significant results, whereas Japan's responsiveness was high in the talks on pharmaceuticals, which received relatively low pressure from the US.

The MOSS talks are important not only for their theoretical value but also for their policy implications. The initiation of the Structural Impediments Initiative (SII) in 1989 seemed to have suggested that the modus operandi of trade talks between the US and Japan has shifted from talks focused on individual sectors to cross-sectoral ones. SII involved structural problems spanning several sectors of the Japanese economy, such as keiretsu, $^{20}$ as well as issues of the macro economy, such as public investment. However, the recent shift back to sectoral discussions, as seen in the Framework talks, suggests that sector-specific negotiations remain significant for several reasons. One reason is that cross-sectoral discussions such as SII, even if successful, do not necessarily resolve politicized US trade problems with Japan. Measures such as expansionary macro-economic policy and change in land policy may increase exports to and investment

## INTRODUCTION

in Japan. However, there is no guarantee that US exports in sectors of special interest to the US government and the private sector, such as automobiles and telecommunications, will increase. Instead, it is likely that Japanese firms will increase imports of US products that are much less politically important, such as US-made Honda, or increase imports from other countries, such as computers made in Malaysia.

Further reason that sector-specific talks remain important is that the US is likely to continue setting agendas that are strongly influenced by sectoral interests, as evidenced by the current discussions over automobiles and auto parts. Accordingly, in order to mitigate sectoral pressure, the US administration will continue to be sector-specific instead of dealing with cross-sectoral issues, of which the consequence on the trade balance is not at all clear. $^{21}$ Thus, sector specific talks continue to be an important form of US-Japan trade negotiations. Therefore, it is important to investigate the conditions under which such talks successfully achieve market liberalization in Japan.

Table 1.1 Comparison of US exports of products negotiated under the MOSS talks to US total exports (million US dollars)

<table><tr><td></td><td>1982</td><td>1983</td><td>1984</td><td>1985</td></tr><tr><td>Total US exports to the World (A)</td><td>210,929</td><td>199,144</td><td>216,008</td><td>211,420</td></tr><tr><td>Total US exports to Japan (B)</td><td>20,663</td><td>21,561</td><td>23,162</td><td>22,166</td></tr><tr><td>(B)/(A) x 100</td><td>9.8%</td><td>10.8%</td><td>10.7%</td><td>10.5%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">MOSS sectors</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Pharmaceuticals (SITC 54)</td></tr><tr><td>Export total (C1)</td><td>2,390</td><td>2,612</td><td>2,759</td><td>2,843</td></tr><tr><td>To Japan (D1)</td><td>500</td><td>526</td><td>534</td><td>567</td></tr><tr><td>D1/C1</td><td>20.9%</td><td>20.1%</td><td>19.3%</td><td>19.9%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Forest Products (SITC 63)</td></tr><tr><td>Export total (C2)</td><td>226</td><td>281</td><td>221</td><td>189</td></tr><tr><td>To Japan (D2)</td><td>17</td><td>18</td><td>18</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>D2/C2</td><td>7.8%</td><td>6.3%</td><td>8.3%</td><td>9.9%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Electronics (SITC 75)</td></tr><tr><td>Export total (C4)</td><td>10,431</td><td>12,116</td><td>15,149</td><td>15,707</td></tr><tr><td>To Japan (D4)</td><td>780</td><td>843</td><td>1,093</td><td>1,199</td></tr><tr><td>D4/C4</td><td>7.5%</td><td>7.0%</td><td>7.2%</td><td>7.6%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="5">Telecommunications Equipment (SITC 76)</td></tr><tr><td>Export total (C5)</td><td>4,111</td><td>4,015</td><td>4,324</td><td>4,679</td></tr><tr><td>To Japan (D5)</td><td>277</td><td>294</td><td>307</td><td>271</td></tr><tr><td>D5/C5</td><td>6.7%</td><td>7.3%</td><td>7.1%</td><td>5.8%</td></tr></table>

Sources: Data compiled from United Nations, International Trade Statistics Yearbook, 1985 and OECD, Foreign Trade by Commodities

# INTRODUCTION

## ARGUMENT IN BRIEF

The argument of this book is that the bureaucracy is the central actor in Japan's market liberalization. However, what is more important is despite its centrality, the bureaucracy faces a number of constraints placed on its ability to liberalize markets. Most importantly, the bureaucracy is not a unified actor that single-mindedly pursues industrial growth. Rather, the bureaucracy is a complex mosaic of various ministries with diverse goals which the Japanese government must satisfy. In addition, each ministry has varying degrees of autonomy and ranges of policy instruments which may further constrain its ability to carry out market liberalization. Furthermore, the types of relationships ministries maintain with the private sector may increase or decrease ministries' ability to implement policies that conflict with the interests of the private sector.

## DESIGN OF THE BOOK

This book is divided into three sections: a theoretical framework, case studies, and a concluding chapter that explores both theoretical implications and policy recommendations for the US and Japanese governments. In Chapter 2, I will lay out several approaches to understanding foreign economic policymaking in Japan. I contend that while international factors, gaiatsu or foreign pressure in particular, are important in creating incentives for policy change in Japan, both the state (ministries) and the private sector must be incorporated in order to explain why Japan demonstrates varying responsiveness to gaiatsu. In Chapters 3, 4 and 5, I will examine cases from the MOSS talks in order to investigate factors that are important in determining Japanese foreign economic policy formation. In Chapter 3, I will demonstrate the relevance of gaiatsu in soliciting policy changes in Japan, while showing that there is no linear relationship between the amount of gaiatsu and Japan's responsiveness. In order to understand why Japan responded more in some MOSS cases but less in others to gaiatsu, in Chapters 4 and 5, I will investigate the elements of the capacity of ministries and the ministries' relationship with the private sector. In the final chapter, I will discuss direct and indirect implications of the MOSS talks on both the state and society relationship in Japan and the power of the bureaucracy. In addition, I will make several policy recommendations to both the US and Japanese governments in order to promote cooperative economic relationships between the two countries.

## 2

# EXPLAINING JAPANESE FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY

In this chapter, I will first lay out several approaches for explaining Japanese foreign economic policy. I will begin with international systems-level analyses in order to demonstrate the importance of foreign pressure in explaining Japanese foreign economic policy. Then, I will move on to state-level approaches. In general, Japan's policymaking is well explained by approaches of this level. However, by indicating the increasing importance of ministries other than MITI, I will indicate a gap in existing state-level approaches. In addition, I will outline a society-level approach that focuses on interest groups. The strength of this approach is its consideration of social input. However, the main purpose of this section is to indicate its weakness, even in explaining American foreign policy (which is usually portrayed as the result of bargaining among various interest groups). The second half of this chapter will be an attempt to construct a new theoretical framework that helps to explain the foreign economic policymaking of various Japanese ministries. The approach taken in this framework aims at underscoring variations of the 'capacity of ministries', which determines the extent to which a ministry can pursue market liberalization on a given issue.

## CONTENDING APPROACHES TO JAPANESE FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY

Hegemony, international regimes, market dependence, and gaiatsu

International systems-level approaches are relevant in explaining Japan's foreign economic policy, because they help us understand why Japan responds to gaiatsu, or foreign pressure. Despite the common international recognition that Japan keeps its markets closed to foreign entrants, Japan has lifted the majority of its formal trade barriers, such as tariffs, quantitative restrictions, restrictions on foreign direct investment,

and controls on international capital transactions. These policy moves are in part explained by US requests that Japan liberalize its markets, a cycle of reaction common since the 1970s. On the international systems level, there are three main reasons why Japan has responded and still responds to gaiatsu to liberalize its markets.

The most important reason is that the US has been a hegemonic power, and therefore Japan has had to respond to pressure exerted by the US. According to hegemonic stability theories, if a state has an overwhelmingly strong economy - namely, if the state is a hegemon - its interest is to establish an international free trade system in order to ensure overseas export markets. $^{1}$ While the 'benevolent hegemon' version of this theory holds that the hegemonic state will unilaterally open its markets - with the expectation that other states will reciprocate and open their markets - it is often the case that other states try to free ride and exploit the hegemon's open markets while closing their own. Thus, as the 'coercive hegemon' version of this theory maintains, the hegemonic state must pressure others to open their markets. For the less powerful states, there is no choice but to acquiesce in the demands of the hegemonic power, out of fear of punishment.

In addition, the reason why Japan responds to gaiatsu is the existence of international regimes. Although the topic is debatable, many scholars maintain that US hegemony has already declined. $^{2}$ The relevant question, then, is that if US hegemony has already declined, why does Japan try to meet US demands to open its markets? The adherents of international regimes theory suggest that international regimes, defined as 'sets of implicit or explicit principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures around which actors' expectations converge in a given area of international relations', have persistent effects on the decisions of member states even after the initial international distribution of power has changed. $^{3}$ In the international trade area, it is difficult to distinguish the effects of the two factors, that is, US hegemony and the free trade regime exemplified by the GATT, when Japan responds to gaiatsu for more open markets.

But there is no doubt that the rules and norms of the GATT regime have had a lasting effect on the ideas lying behind Japan's trade policy formation. For instance, during the Uruguay Round, the Japanese government tried to strengthen the authority of the GATT panel for conflict resolution. $^{4}$ The goal of the Japanese government was to prevent unilateral use of anti-dumping measures by GATT members. The Japanese proposal included a provision to allow the panel to consider data submitted by firms when investigating a case of dumping. The final Uruguay Round agreement failed to include this provision because the US government was the primary opponent of this provision. While the US government is not willing to give up its authority to unilaterally rule on anti-dumping,

Japan's proposal indicated that the Japanese government supports multilateralism, a pillar of GATT norms. Of course, in the past, Japanese industries frequently became targets of anti-dumping measures; thus, the high likelihood that Japanese industries may become targets in the future is probably the foremost reason why Japan opposes unilateral use of anti-dumping measures. However, it is also true that Japan will increasingly want to levy anti-dumping duties on products such as textiles and colour TVs from newly industrializing economies (NIEs), Asian NIEs in particular. Given that the Japanese government also has a stake in maintaining lax enforcement of anti-dumping measures, Japan's proposal is not necessarily due to short-term interests related to its own industries. It is an indicator that the Japanese government prefers multilateral conflict resolution to unilateral measures.

The final reason why Japan responds to gaiatsu is explained by theories of interdependence or transnational relations. They suggest that growing economic interdependence, defined as 'situations characterized by reciprocal effects among countries or among actors in different countries' has a deep impact on economic policymaking. $^{5}$ Japan responds to US pressure to open its markets not only because the US has been a powerful hegemon but also because Japanese policymakers and business leaders fear that the US might close its markets to Japanese exports if Japan does not respond. Japan has a large stake in keeping US markets open due to Japan's heavy dependence - about 30 per cent of the total value of Japanese exports - on the US for export markets.

In sum, international system-level factors explain why Japan has few choices except to respond when pressured to open its markets. Thus, this level of analysis tells us that Japan cannot further close its markets. It also tells us that Japan has to make changes to satisfy US interests. Hegemonic pressure determines the direction in which Japan must change its policies. However, the speed with which Japan will make such changes in various issue areas remains to be explained.

## The state

Given the historical and ideological celebration of small government, American political scientists paid little attention to the autonomous functions of the state. $^{6}$ However, in the late 1970s, this trend was challenged by the emergence of a number of writings using state-centred approaches. $^{7}$ In the field of foreign policy, while the state as an arena for policymaking was never forgotten, $^{8}$ it was only in the late 1970s that the state was considered to be an autonomous actor insulated from pressure groups. $^{9}$

To be sure, the initial development of the state-centred approach in American political science was dominated by the concept of the US as a

'weak state'. Although the American state was gradually assigned a larger role independent of sectoral pressure, it was still considered to have lower capacity to attain goals than strong states such as France and Japan. $^{10}$

This distinction between strong and weak states was rather misleading for a number of reasons. First, as Stephan Haggard points out, a state's ability to impose its own interest upon policy outcomes is not constant over time nor across issue areas. $^{11}$ Furthermore, a state may be insulated from sectoral pressure ('strong state') but nonetheless, as in the case of Japan's market liberalization, it may produce a policy outcome that is no different from the outcome of a weak state. Finally, the distinction makes it difficult to compare the capacities for policymaking and policy implementation over various issues of states that belong to opposite categories.

Although the strong state-weak state distinction has such faults as an analytical tool, the idea that Japan is a 'strong state' has been widely accepted in Japanese political science since the Nihon Setji Gakkat (The Japanese Political Science Association) published a series of articles on the state-centred argument. $^{12}$ The state-centred approach to Japanese policymaking was often called the 'ruling triad' or elitist model. $^{13}$ This model is somewhat like a sophisticated version of the popular 'Japan, Inc.' stereotype, employing imagery which portrays the Japanese state as 'a unitary, interest-maximizing, rational actor'. $^{14}$ The elitist model depicts a Japanese state in which power is concentrated in the hands of the state bureaucracy, the LDP, and big business. The Japanese state is thought to pursue economic growth, supported by a consensus among these three actors.

In this model, the Japanese state makes economic policies and imposes them upon society. The underlying assumption of the elitist model was that the state bureaucracy presides on the top of the power triangle supported by the two other powerful actors, the LDP and big business. However, the policymaking of state ministries other than MITI, and to a far lesser extent, the Ministry of Finance, received next to no attention. This is because throughout the postwar period until the 1970s, MITI played an important role in obtaining what was considered Japan's overriding national interest, that is, rapid economic recovery and industrial growth. Needless to say, Chalmers Johnson's contention that Japan was a 'developmental state' led by MITI gained great influence in the study of Japan's policymaking. $^{15}$

While the Diet, which is constitutionally the highest authority of Japanese state power, remained passive and the bureaucracy continued to be the main source of policymaking, some claim that by the mid-1970s, LDP politicians have gained increasing expertise and thus influence in policymaking. $^{16}$ Therefore, the relevant question is to what extent the LDP intervenes in policymaking and what is left for the bureaucracy to handle

exclusively. On this point, Daniel Okimoto presents a useful issue typology based on the functional divisions of the state bureaucracy. $^{17}$ He contends that each issue and ministry in charge of the issue possesses a different degree of politicization depending on the type of political exchange between interest groups and the LDP. This typology helps to clarify the division of labour between the LDP and the bureaucracy. Moreover, it demonstrates that sectors under certain ministries such as MITI and the Ministry of Finance are less politicized than those under other ministries such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries.

However, Okimoto's view is only a snap-shot of political relationships. It is a mistake to assume that the type of relationship between an interest group and the LDP is constant over time (for example, the relationship between the LDP and rice producers seems to be becoming less politicized today than it was under the LDP's rule). Therefore, Okimoto's study only provides a framework within which further study on ministries is needed.

In addition, the usefulness of the entire body of literature on the LDP's policymaking ability has been drastically reduced since the LDP's monopoly on power was broken in July 1993. Even if the LDP regains power, as it did in June 1994, it will not be able to resurrect the ties it maintained with private sector interest groups before it left the government. Because the revision of the political funding law, which passed the Diet in January 1994, will place a strict limit on corporate contributions to both political parties and individual politicians (with the further provision that corporate contributions will be banned in five years), it is unlikely that the LDP politicians will try to lobby for increased public expenditures or favourable legislation for industries such as construction and transportation in exchange for financial contributions.

## Interest groups

Society-level explanations based on pluralism maintain that policy outputs are the result of competition among groups or individuals for political and economic benefits. $^{18}$ In this political framework, the state per se does not play an active role and is alleged to play the role of a referee. In other words, a state does not have much autonomy from sectoral pressure.

Studies on interest groups are important for understanding social input into policymaking, but exclusive focus on private actors will overlook important factors that affect the policymaking process. Even in the US, where the state is often considered weak and offers what David B. Truman called 'multiplicity of points of access', the state has evolved into something more complicated than just an arena for bargaining among interest

groups. $^{19}$ The US Congress may still offer points of access to sectoral interests, but there are other institutions more insulated from sectoral pressure. $^{20}$ For instance, foreign economic policy is formulated not only by the Congress but also by other government institutions such as the President, executive branch agencies, and departments such as the Departments of Treasury, State and Commerce. These institutions usually demonstrate some degree of insulation from the private sector. These varying degrees of insulation from sectoral pressure suggest that the interest group approach is still valid within a certain arena of policymaking, such as the Congress, but we may have to use other approaches to institutions less vulnerable to sectoral pressure. $^{21}$ By focusing on institutions and actors in the American state which are more insulated from sectoral pressure, we are better able to answer paradoxes such as why the US continued to reduce trade barriers after the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of 1934. $^{22}$

While American political scientists began to pay more attention to the state in the 1970s, the opposite trend was seen in Japan. Some scholars unsatisfied with the elitist model focused on the activities of interest groups in Japan, thereby introducing a 'pluralistic' approach to Japan's policymaking. $^{23}$ This development was in part accelerated by the increasing visibility of interest group activities in Japan in the 1960s. $^{24}$ For instance, both Muramatsu Michio and Ötake Hideo analysed how the different actors in the private sector influence the political process in Japan.

However, the application of American-style approaches based on interest group politics to Japan's policymaking appears to be subject to inherent limits, due to the nature of the Japanese state and its relationship with society. Most importantly, it is undeniable that the bureaucracy plays a central role in policy formation due to two main factors: its strictly meritocratic recruitment and its information gathering ability. Although it is debatable whether the entrance exam for career bureaucrats accurately tests ability to perform the roles expected of the bureaucracy by society, the policy of using entrance exams and excluding political appointees (except for the minister and one or two political vice-ministers for each ministry), gives ministries a high degree of autonomy from political pressure. In addition, due to the long history of close interaction between the ministries and the private sector, the Japanese bureaucracy vastly surpasses politicians in its ability to collect information on private firms, the economy, and the likely effects of policy changes.

An additional limit placed on private firms to compete freely for favourable policy outcomes is that the activities of firms in the Japanese private sector is severely limited to 'compartmentalized competition'. $^{25}$ Under this system, there is little room for private actors in different

sectors to compete for policy influence, although different sectors each have their own free market competition. A main reason is that the bureaucracy has created divisions in the economy, by assigning each ministry (and more precisely each bureau of a ministry) specific industries to oversee, and these divisions have survived over time. Hence, a genuinely pluralist policy process is unlikely, because opposing interests across different sectors do not normally come into conflict with each other and compete for influence in policymaking. $^{26}$

## A GAP IN THE EXISTING LITERATURE

If the interest group approach faces certain constraints due to the peculiar nature of the state and society relationship in Japan, a state-centred approach that does not incorporate variations of policymaking patterns among different institutions is not sufficient to explain Japan's economic policy formation. Thus, among existing theories, the institutionalist argument is the most suitable for analysing patterns of policymaking.

The 'new' institutional approach originally conceptualized by James B. March and Johan P. Olsen places its focus on the state as a set of autonomous political institutions. $^{27}$ It de-emphasizes the role of economic and social conditions played in decision-making but leans more toward the 'design of political institutions'. $^{28}$ Institutional design, or structure, refers to both 'the organizational characteristics' of groups and to the rules and norms that guide the relationships between actors' $^{29}$ This approach enables us to see capacities and resources of various organizations that comprise the state and thus will be useful for understanding the determinants of policy outcomes on various issues. $^{30}$

The major weakness of this approach is that institutional structure itself does not necessarily determine the ultimate content of policies. In addition to structure and the interest calculations proposed by rational-choice theorists, the ideas held by policymakers encourage them to propose and shape the ultimate content of policies. $^{51}$ This is particularly true for Japanese bureaucrats, whose historical mandate has been social, economic and political reforms in order to attain an equal footing with the West, a goal which has often been indifferent to particular interests in society. Thus, ideas serve as a strong complementary factor in determining outcomes of foreign economic policy when they are incorporated into the institutionalist argument. $^{52}$ Moreover, in order to incorporate the merits of society-level explanations, a broader conception of institutional structure, which describes the structural relationship between state and society, will be useful in analysing how societal interests are represented in the policymaking of a state.
