© Patsy Healey, Abdul Khakee, Alain Motte, Barrie Needham and contributors 1997

This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. No reproduction without permission. All rights reserved.

First published in 1997 by UCL Press UCL Press Limited 1 Gunpowder Square London EC4A 3DE and 1900 Frost Road, Suite 101 Bristol Pennsylvania 19007-1598 USA

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2006.

"To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge's collection of thousands of eBooks please go to http://www.ebookstore.tandf.co.uk/."

The name of University College London (UCL) is a registered trade mark used by UCL Press with the consent of the owner.

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data are available

ISBN 0-203-45150-3 Master e-book ISBN

ISBN 0-203-45873-7 (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBNs: 1-85728-663-4 (Print Edition) HB
1-85728-664-2 (Print Edition) PB

Every effort has been made to contact copyright holders for their permission to reprint material in this book. The publishers would be grateful to hear from any copyright holder who is not here acknowledged and will undertake to rectify any errors or omissions in future editions of this book.

## CONTENTS

Acknowledgements vii

List of contributors ix

## PART I

1 The revival of strategic spatial planning in Europe 3

Patsy Healey

2 An institutionalist approach to spatial planning 20

Patsy Healey

## PART II

3 A plan of hope and glory An example of development planning in Denmark 38

after Maastricht

Ib Jørgensen, Finn Kjærsdam, Jan Nielsen

4 Building strategic urban planning in France The Lyon urban area 1981-93 57

experiments

Alain Motte

5 Images as institution builders Metropolitan planning in Madrid 75

Michael Neuman

6 Building new institutions for strategic planning Transforming Lisbon into the 92

Atlantic capital of Europe

Lia T. Vasconcelos & Arminda C. Reis

7 Plan-making in the Zürich region 111

Hellmut Ringli

8 Strategic development planning in western Norway Hordaland County and 129

the City of Bergen

Arild Holt-Jensen

9 Rhetoric and reality in British structure planning in Lancashire, 1993-5 146

Simin Davoudi, Patsy Healey, Angela Hull

10 A plan with a purpose The regional plan for the province of Friesland, 1994 164

Barrie Needham

11 Working in a democratic culture Structure planning in Marks Kommun 181

Abdul Khakee

12 Community to communication The Schema Strutturale per la provincia di 197 Grosseto, 1990--designing strategies Alessandro Vignozzi

## PART III

13 The institutional relations of plan-making 218
Alain Motte

14 Agenda-setting in European spatial planning 238 Abdul Khakee

15 Planning strategies and planning methods 251
Barrie Needham

16 Strategic plan-making and building institutional capacity 264
Patsy Healey, Abdul Khakee, Alain Motte, Barrie Needham

Index 278

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This book has been the product of a collaboration not only between the various authors whose work is in the book. It has also greatly benefited from the critical contributions of others who attended the workshops, and in particular, Andreas Faludi, Luigi Mazza, Alex Fubini, Pekka Virtanen, Hartmut Dieterich, Louis Albrechts, Tim Shaw and Dick Williams. We would also like to thank those who acted as hosts to our workshops at the University of Newcastle, the University of Nijmegen and the Catholic University of Leuven, and NIPOS (Nijmeegs Instituut von Planning en Ongeveingsstudies) and the Tyne and Wear Development Corporation for financial support. Our thanks to Bret Fleming for help with graphics, to Richard Newton for proof-reading the text, to Jill Connolly for helping with organizing the seminars and managing the to-and-from process as we edited the chapters. Thanks also to Susan Smith and Yasmin Ibrahim for efficient last-minute secretarial help. We have also appreciated the advice of Roger Jones, our publisher.

Individual authors would also like to make specific acknowledgements. Michael Neuman thanks the Carfax Publishing Company for permission to reproduce Figures 5.1 and 5.2 from European Planning Studies 4(3), pp. 302 and 305. Lia Vasconcelos and Arminda Reis thank RISCO for supplying the urban fringe model figure used in Figure 6.4. (from Câmara Municipal de Lisboa (CML), 1993b).

# CONTRIBUTORS

Simin Davoudi has been researching in various aspects of planning systems and urban policy for many years. Her main interest is in policy processes in relation to strategic planmaking, environmental sustainability and urban regeneration. Her publications include: Rebuilding the city (co-editor; Spon, 1992), Managing cities (co-editor, John Wiley, 1995) and several journal articles and book chapters on development plans and urban regeneration. She is currently a lecturer in the Bartlett School of Planning, University College London, 22 Gordon Street, London, WC1H 0QB.

Patsy Healey has been researching in planning theory and planning practice for many years. She is particularly interested in the relation between communicative approaches in planning theory, the political economy of urban region dynamics and the relation with the policy processes and substantive contents of spatial planning practices. She has published extensively on these issues, including Local plans in British land use planning (Pergamon 1983), Land use planning and the mediation of urban change (with McNamara, Elson and Doak; Cambridge University Press, 1988), Managing cities (with Cameron, Davoudi, Graham and Madani Pour as co-editors; John Wiley, 1995), Negotiating development (with Purdue and Ennis; Spon, London 1995), and Collaborative planning: shaping places in fragmented societies (Macmillan 1997). She is currently director of the Centre for Research in European Urban Environments at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle NE1 7RU.

Arild Holt-Jensen received his MA in geography in 1963 on a regional study of the mountain commune Rauland in Telemark, which was further elaborated to a high mountain recreational plan. He received his doctorate in 1986 on a study of the effects of comprehensive planning on settlement and population development in 17 municipalities in the Kristiansand area of Norway. He has published textbooks in geography and has worked on environmental planning and management of national parks and related reserves. He has actively participated in local politics for the Liberal Party as member of Bergen City Council and chairman of Landaas Township Council. He is currently Professor of Geography at the University of Bergen, with special responsibility for the courses in local and regional planning, Department of Geography, Breiviken 2, 5035 Bergen, Sandviken, Norway.

Angela Hull has been researching in various aspects of regulatory systems and mechanisms over the last few years having spent the first part of her career as a planning practitioner. She is particularly interested in the relation between government intervention, urban region institutional capacity and spatial impacts. Her recent published work includes articles and book chapters on strategic planning, institutional relations, information diffusion in regulatory systems, and renewable energy policies. She is currently a lecturer in the Department of Town and Country Planning at the University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU.

1b Jørgenson is Associate Professor in Planning and Society at Aalborg University, Department of Development and Planning, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark. He is a graduate (magistrum artium) in cultural sociology from the University of Copenhagen and has, among other subjects, researched in public participation, community organization, the welfare state and the politics of planning in Denmark and the USA since 1970. Presently he is doing research on evolving effects and consequences of EU planning and regional politics in general and in Denmark in particular.  
Abdul Khakee received his PhD in economics from the University of Göteborg in 1969 and his PhD in geography from Umea University in 1983. He has taught at the Göteborg School of Economics and the Universities of Stockholm and Umea. He has been visiting researcher at the University of Delaware, Bari Polytechnic, the University of Lisbon and the University of Melbourne. He is currently Professor of Urban Planning in the Department of Political Science, Umea University, Sweden. He is the author of several books and many journal articles on planning theory and planning practice, development planning and cultural economics. He was awarded the President's Medal by the Operational Research Society (UK) in 1994.  
Finn Kjersdam is Professor of Urban Planning at Aalborg University. He has been a member of the Council of the Association of European Schools of Planning, the European Council of Town Planners and the International Society of City and Regional Planners, for many years. He is presently Dean of Engineering and Sciences at Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark.  
Alain Motte is Professor in Urban Planning and Head at the Institut d'Aménagement Regional, Université d'Aix-Marseille, 13100 Aix en Provence, France since 1992. (He was Professor and Head of the Institut d'Urbanisme de Grenoble between 1988 and 1991). He received his Doctorat d'Etat in Economics in 1977 at the University of Aix-Marseille. His research is centred on public policies in urban planning at metropolitan and national levels. His main recent publication is a book, for which he acts as editor, on French planning policies: Schéma directeur et agglomeration project: the experimentation of new urban policies (1981-1994) (Paris: Juris Service editions, 1995).  
Barrie Needham has carried out research into the practice of local and regional planning and into powers and instruments for implementing plans and planning policies. In connection with the latter, he has researched into and published widely about land policy. Since 1978 he has lived and worked in the Netherlands, where much of his research has been on interpreting Dutch planning for non-Dutch speakers. He is currently Professor of Spatial Planning at the University of Nijmegen, PO Box 9208, 6500 HK, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.  
Michael Neuman received his PhD in city and regional planning from the University of California at Berkeley in 1996. He recently lived in Spain for two years, conducting research in Madrid and Barcelona. A planning theorist who has practised as a planner in local, county and state governments in the USA, he also consults and publishes internationally on strategic planning and consensus building. His recent research is on city, metropolitan and state planning and politics. He has won many awards, including a Fulbright Fellowship and a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. His current address is: Department of City and Regional Planning, Wurster Hall, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Jan Nielsen has been researching in various aspects of planning systems, urban policy, planning theory and planning practice for many years. He received his PhD in 1990 on a study titled Strategy or democracy in local planning in Denmark. He has published textbooks and journal articles within the field of planning theory and planning practice in Denmark, and is currently, as an Associate Professor in the Department of Development and Planning, Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark, doing research in various aspects of spatial planning in Europe.

Arminda Reis, architect since 1977, works in a Municipal Department for Housing and Planning in Setubal. She has a masters degree in regional and urban planning and has been involved in research concerning the management of information for planning at municipal level with GIS. She wrote a book on Municipal geographic information systems (Edicoes Fim de Seculo, 1993). In 1995 she began her doctoral degree, researching the implementation of municipal geographic information systems, which focuses on the management of change in organizations. Her current address is Quinta de Vanicelos. Lote $22^{\circ}$ Dto, Setubal, Portugal.

Hellmut Ringli graduated as an architect at the Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich and studied town and regional planning at the Graduate School of Ekistiks in Athens. After four years of consulting work in town planning with Doxiadis Associates in Greece and Ghana, in 1967 he joined the Institute for Local, Regional and National Planning (ORL-Institute) at the ETH Zurich, Hoenggerberg, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland. Since then, as a senior staff member, he has been mainly involved in research, development and consulting projects at the national and cantonal level. From 1969 to 1973 he was project manager for the "Swiss national development concepts" project on behalf of the federal government. For many years he has been advising the Federal Office of Spatial Planning on various activities.

Lia T. Vasconcelos lectures in the Department of Environmental Engineering, New University of Lisbon, Quinta da Torre, 2825 Monte de Caparica, Portugal. Her research has focused on the processes of the use of information, particularly in complex multi-actor issues within the context of environmental quality and growth management. She is also interested in the role played by technology in enhancing these processes. Her work has involved the study of participatory settings in the building up of institutions, namely through collaborative group processes development.

Alessandro Vignozzi is an urban designer/planner in private practice and collaborates as a PhD student with the Dipartimento di Urbanistica e Pianificazione del Territorio at the Facoltà di Architettura in Florence. His research is centred on innovation in plan-making and the aesthetic quality of the built environment. He wrote an essay on design control in Italian planning for a monographic issue of the journal Built Environment, edited by John Punter. His last work is a book on the experience of aesthetic control in England and its theoretical and practical implications from the point of view of Italian planning practice. His current address is Via dei Serragli 101, 50124 Firenze, Italy.

## PART I

# CHAPTER ONE The revival of strategic spatial planning in Europe

Patsy Healey

Introduction

Spatial planning in Europe

This book is about new directions in the practice of spatial planning in Europe in the 1980s and 1990s. Its focus is on how spatial strategies are made and translated into plans and projects for managing spatial change, development investment and environmental quality in urban regions. A strategic approach to land-use regulation and investment in urban and regional spatial development was dominant in many European countries in the 1960s. By the 1980s, the strategic impetus had lapsed in many places. Political and policy attention had tended to shift to the project: infrastructure investment projects, urban transformation projects, business parks and new settlements. By the late 1980s, however, and even more in the 1990s, a strategic approach to the organization of urban and regional space had become more prevalent. These new efforts in strategic spatial planning differ significantly from those deployed in the 1960s in their processes and policy agendas. This book focuses on this evolution.

The experience discussed is that of western Europe, including most of the countries now in the European Union, as well as Norway and Switzerland. Despite the diversity between and within these countries, they share two qualities which provide an interesting context for the evolution of strategic spatial planning practices. First, there is a strong appreciation of regional diversity and historical-cultural traditions. Secondly, most evolved some form of social democratic consensus in the period following the Second World War, in which government in some form played a major role in economic and social policy and, commonly, in the urban development process (Esping-Anderson 1990). Current shifts in governance have undermined this consensus but still build on its institutional forms and discourses.

## Spatial planning in context

Spatial planning is about setting frameworks and principles to guide the location of development and physical infrastructure. It consists of a set of governance practices for developing and implementing strategies, plans, policies and projects, and for regulating the location, timing and form of development. These practices are shaped by the dynamics of economic and social change, which give rise to demands for space, location and qualities of places. These dynamics also shape expectations about how demands will

be met, and the values accorded to the attributes of places and buildings. The demands are mediated through local political systems and practices and by regional and national government politics and administration. Through these interactions, general economic and social tendencies interrelate with local conditions and concerns to produce distinctive, contingent responses to the dynamics of urban region change. However, spatial planning practices are not just a contingent response to wider forces. They are also active forces in these changes. Investment decisions, principles for regulating land-use change, and ideas about spatial organization generate constraints and opportunities. These help to shape urban region dynamics. The objective of many of the spatial plan-making exercises discussed in this book is deliberately to "frame" the dynamics of urban region change by shaping the decisions of all the many agents whose activities constitute and carry these dynamics. In this way, government helps to structure both land and property development activity and the agendas of pressure groups and social movements concerned with environmental quality.

This perspective on spatial planning reflects an "institutionalist" approach to social change and public policy. We elaborate this in Chapter 2. It leads us to consider how contemporary spatial plan-making exercises contribute and respond to the changes in the economic, social and political trajectories of today's urban regions. How far are spatial planning practices adapting to these changes? To what extent are they loci of innovation in changing urban region governance practices? What are the potential consequences of such adaptation and innovation, in terms of the economic health, quality of life, social cohesion and environmental quality of regions, and what if there is no adaptation or innovation? What are the implications of current changes for the methods of planning and the roles of planners?

## The argument

The discussion and cases in this book are focused by the following premises. First, we anticipated that strategic spatial planning activity would be taking place in contexts very different to those of the mid-twentieth century. These differences are discussed further in the next section. Three types of difference are of major significance for planning systems. First, the economic restructuring of many of Europe's urban regions towards new forms of production relations, and an expansion and diversification of the service sector, have generated pressures on urban regions. This leads local political communities to seek ways of developing and promoting their economies in proactive ways. Secondly, the combination of fiscal stress in the public sector and the leverage of neoliberal political philosophy have led to new relationships between public and private sectors in the land and property development sector. Thirdly, the growing political influence of the environmental movement, and a whole range of other lobby groups, have focused significant political attention on the impacts of projects to change local environments. One question of the study was therefore to examine how Europe's planning systems were responding to new contexts. Are the systems inherited from the past robust enough for present circumstances? Are they being transformed and, if so, into what institutional forms and with what consequences?

A second premise relates to the nature of strategic plan-making. We understand this as a social process through which a range of people in diverse institutional relations and

positions come together to design plan-making processes and develop contents and strategies for the management of spatial change. This process generates not merely formal outputs in terms of policy and project proposals, but a decision framework that may influence relevant parties in their future investment and regulatory activities. It may also generate ways of understanding, ways of building agreement, of organizing and of mobilizing to influence in political arenas. This social process, we assume, is shaped by both the dynamics of urban region change and by the formal law and procedure of existing spatial and land-use planning systems. We also recognize that the effort of plan-making itself has the potential to be an active force in both the trajectory of urban region change and in the framing and realization of formal policy systems. We were, therefore, interested on the one hand in the interaction between the active work of "agency" in realizing and shaping structuring forces and, on the other, the "driving power" of these forces, with respect to the governance of the spatial organization of urban regions. This approach is developed further in Chapter 2.

A third premise was that the policy field of strategic spatial planning is of importance to political communities in many urban regions in contemporary Europe. The locational patterning of places is being significantly changed by major investments--in transport, development and telecommunications infrastructures. Changes in economic organization and in life-styles are leading to new ways of using urban region space, devaluing some locations and revaluing others. New understandings of environmental impacts and capacity constraints force reconsideration of the value of sites, locations and environmental assets. We therefore anticipated that spatial planning would attract significant political and policy attention.

Finally, we recognized that, within western Europe, spatial planning systems and practices have evolved in a distinctive historical, institutional and cultural context. One dimension of this context is a deep valuing of the qualities of place and an appreciation of their diversity. More specifically with respect to spatial planning systems, there is a settled acceptance of the importance of individual property rights, combined with a recognition that it is legitimate for governments to limit these rights in the collective interest. This acceptance has been reinforced over the years by a positive view of many of the measures introduced in post-war welfare states (Esping-Anderson 1990). Although in most countries, spatial planning is grounded at the regional or local level of government, there are also long-standing traditions of intervention at the urban region level, to provide master plans and strategies for towns and cities. This means that formal procedures and institutional arenas for strategic spatial plan-making in the machinery of spatial and land-use planning systems have been in existence for many years and do not have to be invented de novo. In this context, we sought to explore how political communities in urban regions were expressing themselves in their spatial plans, what they identified as key actions to pursue in the public interest and what institutional processes and arenas they were using to articulate their concerns. Specifically in our study, we were interested in the way the rich inheritance of institutional resources for managing spatial change in urban regions embodied in formal planning systems was being used and redesigned to meet new challenges.

These issues are explored through ten case studies of spatial strategy-making. Each has been selected from within each country as representative of leading edge or innovatory practices in some respect (Healey 1994). To set the above issues in context,
