pursuit, he took a curve too wide. The speeding truck crashed into a ravine and flipped over, crushing the girl beside him.

Ana squeezed Rosie's hand as the surgeon spoke softly, measuring each word for tact as he explained Makali'i's condition, her shattered skull, her chances of recovery. In the following weeks Rosie sat silent, tended by the family while Ana watched her child, a strapping boy named Koa Jacob Jesus. He would be a three-god child. As she held him, she watched cars drive slowly past, like in the old days, the ogling of unregenerate voyeurs.

People pointed at the house where the "gang girl" lived, the one now rumored to be brain-dead. Ana imagined how they appeared to strangers: maimed and warped, a family of illegitimates. She suspected that Makali'i would be their icon when they spoke of bad blood; the downward spiral of that family's genes.

The girl remained in a coma for weeks. Her body, hooked up to transparent tubes, appeared smaller yet somehow larger--an immense absence in her presence. Whatever part of her still alive was no longer in the room. In that time, Rosie sat on the porch swing like a statue in repose, eyes slung low, her mouth and lips weightless. Sometimes she sat out there all night. In humid mornings, steam rose from her shoulders, air rippled with her body heat like concentric afterimages of herself. Her odor so strong they smelled her pulse.

No one in the family seemed able to speak. All they knew was pain. At night there was only the sound of cicadas like scorching heat rendered into sound. Even youngsters--little beauties dark and electric--moved on tiptoe, their expressions at the window sad. Lopaka's face was so mythical and harsh, Ana moved close, wanting to press the tattooed teardrop near his eye as if it were a doorbell. Wanting to gain entry and share his pain.

She tried to talk to Rosie, to draw her out. Finally, she just sat with her, rocking back and forth. Afraid she was losing her, that Rosie's mind would go, Ana began to pray. She even stopped using profanities. She waited. What would happen waited with her.

THE DAY WAS OVERCAST AND MOODY WHEN THE PHONE RANG. Lopaka answered it, then left the house. Hours later he returned, switched off the ignition of the car, and sat staring through the windshield. Then he slowly walked up to the screen door and asked Ana to come out to the

yard. In the kitchen, she was suddenly aware of the smell of wet drain-boards.

She stepped out to the lānai, and moved down the steps. She searched Lopaka's face as he placed his hand on her shoulder. Then she sank slowly to the ground, folding like a paper doll.

Anticipating her question, in a confused reflex, he asked the question instead. "She's dead, isn't she?"

"Is she?" Ana asked.

"She is."

PART THREE

# HŌ'IKE NA KA PU'UWAI

Revelations of the Heart

# MAKANI PĀHILI

Hurricane

FOR YEARS SHE WILL DREAM OF FLYING OVER MILES OF TREMBLING, turquoise skin. Of planes stacked upside down like smashed toys. Boats sprawled belly-up across wrecked piers. A body floating in a harbor. She will remember buckled tarmac, her plane skidding sideways, coming to a bouncing stop. Relief crews stretching bright blue tarp over miles of roofless houses.

She will remember the crunch of shattered glass as they climbed through the rubble of hotels, searching for survivors. Winds moaning through thousands of caved-in rooms. The wrecked and ringing chandeliers. When flashlight batteries went dead, they searched by candlelight. And when generators failed in makeshift hospitals, they performed surgery by candlelight.

Ever after, when she sees flickering candles, she will think, 'Iniki. 'Iniki brought him to her. He was not in her life. And then he was . . .

THE HURRICANE HIT EVERY ISLAND--TAKING RESORTS, ENTIRE towns. It shaved the island of Kaua'i to the bone--whole forests denuded and flattened, buildings crushed like pickup sticks. For days highways were knee deep in water and debris, undermining the efforts of relief workers. And everywhere surfaces glittered with shattered glass, giving devastation a diamond shimmer.

Twenty-four hours after Hurricane 'Iniki passed, across the blacked-out island homeless people huddled in armory shelters, or at campfires, or they walked the beaches, numb. Near the ruins of the Coco Palms

Hotel, Ana sat at a campfire holding a child who had been pulled unharmed from a nearly flattened house.

She rocked her back and forth, half crooning, "Shh, soon your mama and papa will come for you. Meanwhile, I will tell you a story."

The child stopped struggling as Ana stared at the campfire.

"Now . . . shall I tell you of our island winds? Oh, there are so many they are worshipped as gods. Elders can name two hundred different kinds of winds. There is the Kona wind, warning of winter. It blows long and hard, brings gray, humid weather, torrents of rain! And there is Ha'i Mo'olelo, the 'telling wind,' that makes a haunting sound like bamboo nose flutes heard at night."

Ana spoke softly, watching the child's eyelids flutter. She prayed her sleep would last until her parents were found, that they would be all right, that she would never know the terror of thinking they were dead. While she gazed at the child, a stranger approached and stood listening, just beyond the light of the campfire.

"...As with our winds, there are hundreds of rains. Each one is a god, and has a god-name..."

The child slept now, Ana felt her soft snores against her chest. She looked round the campfire at people needing comfort, and continued "talking-story."

"... Just now we have been in the 'punishing rains and hurling winds,' the time of Makani Pāhili, the hurricane. But now the hurricane is pau. We are in the gentle winds of healing."

She covered the child with a blanket, and long before dawn a priest brought her parents, who took her in their arms. Ana had talked for hours, and now sat back exhausted. And that is when the stranger stepped out of the dark, his sudden face a match-strike, like a painting revealed on the wall of a cave.

He sat down at their fire and began to talk. He talked in mixed accents--the argot of a drifter--his words seeming to bob in the phlegmy workings of his lungs. At some point, almost shyly, he told them his name, then continued spinning tales, distracting them from the wreckage all around them.

The storm had left polluted rivers, water shortages, and, in the daytime, killing heat. Yet this stranger was dressed head to toe in black leather so stiff it creaked. His teeth were big and crooked, his face pale, slightly sunburned. Under thick, dark hair, his eyebrows shot out in ecstatic skyward angles. She found his eyes uncanny--black, intense--the

eyes of someone who could carve his life into another human's skin. He handed out cigarettes and chain-smoked, the movement of his hand slow, almost tender, as he brought the cigarette to his lips. He seemed to anticipate each long inhale like someone who had known deprivation.

Ana glanced round the dying campfire at faces sad and dark as angels, as folks listened, intrigued by this man's stories. He saw they were exhausted, newly homeless, some even wounded. Maybe he saw them as childlike, needing comfort, to just sit still and listen. So he continued, his long-winded yarns slipping through the hours. And listening, they learned how war and hunger had invented him. How his past seemed to give him permission.

He coughed, shared a warm beer, then talked again, rolling up his sleeves and pants. In growing light and heat, sweat cataracted down his neck, soaking through the leather shirt. Ana saw he was lean, of average height, snakes of muscles in his arms and legs. Yet, his hands were remarkably huge and scarred. As morning temperatures continued to rise, he slowly pulled off his leather boots, and then his socks. Even his feet were scarred.

A big red ball of sun ascended, yet he continued telling tales as if he needed to talk himself empty. The sun began to hover, then hammered overhead, the fire slowly embered. National Guardsmen in fatigues passed with chain saws, dragging chopped-up utility poles. The stranger paused in his telling, his eyes darting to armed Marines scouting for looters across the road. They stood laughing at a couple with shotguns in their laps, dozing in front of their dry-goods store. A slapdash sign stood between them, NOTHING HERE WORTH DYING FOR!

The storyteller yawned and someone asked him, "Tired, fellah? Where you from?"

He fell silent as if there were a right and a wrong answer. Now folks slowly stood, preparing to meet the new day's manifesto of tragedies. A thousand more people homeless. Another dozen missing. Another body found. Ana gathered her things and glanced his way as dusty leaves fluttered overhead, casting the stranger in dappled sunlight. In that moment a kind of beauty gathered round him, the beauty of bright sky reflected off black stubble on his chin. He would lose them now; she saw his panic. It was like seeing the whole curve of a man's life pass through him.

She kept her face neutral, hoping it looked kind, the particular kindness one extends to loners and the lost. He bent, helping someone fold a blanket. His shirt fell open; his bare chest looked skinny, almost adoles-

cent. He helped stamp out the fire, then leaned forward offering his hand, telling her his name again.

"Nikolai...Volenko."

A name that seemed to fit his stories.

She shook his hand. "I'm Ana. Well, I've got to get back to the med team..."

"You are doctor?"

"Yes."

"You live here on Kaua'i?"

She shook her head. "I'm one of the volunteer medics from Honolulu."

"So. What I can do to help you?"

The island was already glutted with branches of the military, the National Guard, Red Cross. So many disaster-relief organizations, storm victims were complaining that these people were eating all their rations.

"What did you come here to do?" she asked.

"Normally, I make films ... documentaries."

Ana looked up at half a dozen helicopters with camera lenses hanging from their bays. The media had swarmed in like locusts. She shook her head, picked up her backpack, and walked away.

He ran alongside her. "Wait. I am not ghoul like them. I flew in before hurricane. Was trying to get footage on . . . something else."

"Like what? Our local drug trade? Our women's prison?"

He skipped in front of her, blocking her way, then stood so close tiny shafts of dust danced between them.

"I am not sensationalist. My films are very relevant, very sympathetic." Then he smiled. "You liked my stories?"

She thought of the amazing things he had told them. "They weren't stories one would like, or dislike. Were they true?"

"Yes. And no. I watched you. You are very good listener."

She started to ask what he was doing on the island, but was afraid it would turn into conversation and she would not be able to get away.

She stepped back, half joking, "You'll die in this heat, in those clothes."

He slapped the leather pants and grinned. "Yes. They are killing me." Then he looked around nervously. "So. You do not need help?"

Ana shook her head. "But, thank you."

Reluctantly, he bent to gather a canvas bag and backpack. For some reason she stood there, watching him prepare to go.

"Then. Is better I get off island quick. How I will find you in Honolulu?"

Before she could answer, he saw two Marines approaching from the distance. He suddenly wheeled and headed off.

Ana hesitated, then lifted her arm, calling, "Wait."

He was already a scribble on the landscape.

# NIKOLAO

Nikolai

SOMETIMES WHEN SHE FINISHED HER ROUNDS ON THE WARDS, ANA wandered down to the ER, lending a hand when they needed backup. Since Makali'i's death she had not moved forward with her plans to do a residency in OB-GYN. She had not moved in any direction, grief and loneliness bonding like crystals, creating an overwhelming sense of stasis.

At night, she walked Honolulu's quiet streets, thinking how loneliness was so much a part of human existence it seemed to have a life of its own, an organism that reproduced. She wondered if that's why she had chosen medicine, to remind herself that others were lonely, too, and that they suffered. To see someone suffering when she was not filled her with relief. All she had to do was heal them.

One day her surgeon shook Ana's hand. She had survived her fifth postsurgery year still cancer-free. She had a quiet drink alone, went home to an empty apartment, and stared at what looked like a giant teardrop hanging from her wall. Since surgery, her left arm had grown slightly stiff, so a cousin who taught boxing at the Nu'uanu Y had brought her a speed bag, a little hanging punching bag, and gloves.

Screwing a platform to her wall from which the speed bag hung, he had wrapped her hands in bandages, showing her where to land her fist.

"But don't go at it with anger. Remember when I was a kid, the punch bag hanging from the mango tree? Mango season, I'm punching, all the mangoes falling down. So. When you come at the bag, think 'mango time.'"

At first she was clumsy and impatient, striking the bag angrily as if it were a human face. But once she mastered the punching rhythm, Ana began to relax. It began to be almost fun. Then she went at it with conviction, her upper-body muscles growing taut and strong. The muscles under her scars began to feel resilient, no longer tight and tender. The speed bag woke her body up, made her want to swim again.

Out in the waters of Ala Moana Beach she lazily stroked, feeling the sea melt into her. In the distance, Le'ahi, Diamond Head, that glowing old cadaver. And miles down the coast to her right, the rugged Wai'anae mountain range, reminding her where she belonged. In the parfait colors of a going sun, she floated on her back, eyeing skyscrapers behind her, glass monoliths reflecting kaleidoscopic blue of sea. This time of day the city seemed soft and giving, and Ana realized she had come to love Honolulu. It let her breathe. It left her alone.

On a humid evening as she walked home from the beach, it began to rain a warm, blue evening rain, so soothing she broke into a half trot, then a jog. She jogged past her building and kept running, remembering how as a kid she loved to run in lokuloku rains. Moving along the Ala Wai Canal, Ana thought how parts of Honolulu had long ago entered her and were now secretly owned by her.

The invisible city--the sexual one, its geography--was forever fixed in her memory by early acts of love. The Honolulu Zoo, where as a student she had made love nearby in a young man's car while primates chattered in their cages. Makiki Street, where in a borrowed apartment that same young man had ultimately scorned her. Queen's Hospital, where in the intern's lounge, she had made love to Will Chong. Even Atkinson Drive, down which they walked to reach the sea where Will had said he loved her, that he would trust her with his life.

Where were those young men now? Did they remember her? They had each been ambitious and focused, and would be successful, not prone to sentiment. Her memory would not be essential to their lives. Panting and breathless, she jogged back to her building, and stood looking up at her windows as if waiting for a signal, some code to tell her how to live, how to shoulder the burden of time.

SHE WAS ON THE WARDS WHEN SHE HEARD THEM PAGING FROM ER. A man with nonspecific pains was asking for her.

When she pulled back the curtain in the exam room, he smiled and raised his hand. "Hello, Doctor."

At first she did not remember him, then she recognized the big, scarred hands. "Oh. The campfire, after 'Iniki. You're . . . Nikolai."

"Da." He half sat up, then lay back down.

"What seems to be the problem? Are you in pain?"

He touched his heart. "Only here. You broke it that day. What you will do to me this time?"

She put her stethoscope to his chest, then thoughtfully sat him up and pressed it to his back.

"You've got congestion in your lungs. Have you had flu? An allergic reaction?"

He shook his head. "Only frustration in not finding you."

Ana called in a nurse. "Let's get his vitals and a Chem-24."

He tried to pull away. "Not necessary, Doctor. I am here for you."

"Look. We're very busy here. I don't have time for jokes."

As the nurse drew blood, he winced. "I am not here for jokes. Your cousin, Lopaka, told me where to find you."

Ana paused, then pressed the stethoscope to his back again. "How do you know him?"

"We have things in common . . . environmental things . . ."

"Breathe in deeply." She listened, then frowned. "Sounds like you've got low-grade pneumonia. I'm sending you for X-rays."

She leaned close, staring at a yellowish cast to the whites of his eyes that often meant anemia. He waited till the nurse had left, then took Ana's gloved hand and spoke in careful English.

"I will save you time. Blood counts low. Well . . . normal-low. It is probably going to get worse. Not enough red cells to be carrying sufficient oxygen to vital organs. Not enough white cells to be knocking out infections. Eventually, immune system will be going . . ."

She felt her fingers sweating in the glove.

"I should not have looked for you. Should not be remembering you. Probably I am dying."

She withdrew her hand and tried to joke. "You can't die. We just met."

She walked him to the X-ray unit and, when her shift was over, met him in the hospital coffee shop. A low-dose steroid shot had temporarily stopped his wheezing and his face seemed more relaxed. A rather handsome face, wearied by lines. He looked fifty but she suspected he was younger.

He told her how he had looked for her ever since 'Iniki, but all he

knew was her first name. Then, out on the Wai'anae Coast, he had met Lopaka and mentioned this doctor, Ana, he was searching for.

"Of course, nothing is coincidence. All is ordained, no?"

Coming on the bus to find her, he had experienced wheezing and shortness of breath. "And look, already you have saved me."

Ana sat back, studying him. "You never told me what you were doing on Kaua'i. You said you were shooting footage . . ."

He carefully lowered his throaty bass voice. "Yes. Was shooting Army Missile Test Range at Barking Sands. Was caught by military police climbing over security fence. Soldiers took video camera. They shove Colt .45 in here." He pointed his finger like a gun into his mouth.

"Were taking me for interrogation when 'Iniki hit. This hurricane saved my life. Was still running from them when I see your campfire."

"So...no footage."

"None. But I am working with Lopaka now. Will be other opportunities. I am making documentary, Ana. Very extensive. Including many places."

"That's impressive. But how long have you had this problem with your blood count? Do you know what caused it?"

His voice turned soft, almost elegiac. "How long? Since a child in Russia. Swimming in coal-black rivers. Breathing coal-black dust. Even sheep in fields are black. Other causes? You would like a list? Contaminated soil. Leaking waste. They are calling it 'toxic exposure.' Old-fashioned word is poison."

"We have it here, too. On a smaller scale."

"Da. This is why I am going to your Wai'anae Coast. Why I go to Kaua'i. Is all across Pacific. Everywhere, and never-ending."

She asked if this documentary work was dangerous and he shrugged. When she asked if he made a living at it, he shrugged again.

"So-so. Swedish TV is airing my tapes on coal pollution in Russia, because is same thing now in Europe. German TV is airing tapes on acid rain poisoning forests, rivers, streams."

Only, no one seemed eager to air his tapes on nuclear pollution, or radiation.

"And why? Because all major countries are being guilty of such things."

"What about networks in the U.S.?" Ana asked.

He laughed. "Americans. They are wanting fairy tales. They are so dear . . . so innocent. What will it take, I wonder?"

He told her he had shot footage in French Polynesia. Micronesia. Wherever there were nuclear test sites. He had even interviewed Australian Aborigines, who had been exposed when the British tested H-bombs in Australia in the 1950s and '60s.

"Still sick people there, and no one tells. No one cares."

Unconsciously, Ana touched her chest. "We care. It's just, we have so few resources with which to fight back."

Nikolai leaned forward now, rubbing his hands. "This why I plan to make definitive film on death of modern human morals. Am shooting five years now. In my country you cannot imagine the horrors . . ."

She sat back and gazed at him thoughtfully. "You say you're recording the 'death of human morals.' But ... these people in your films are victims. Just aiming a camera at them is immoral. Isn't it?"

He smiled. And then he frowned. "... Yes. Maybe I too am guilty of exploitation. But, world has to be knowing, has to be informed. I want to be showing what was done to us. What Russia did to own people in race to be world leader. How is happening all over world. I want people looking at these victims, so they are understanding they are seeing their future." Warming to his subject, his face grew flushed.

Ana gave him a moment to compose himself before she asked, "Tell me, how do you get in and out of Russia to make these films?"

He patiently explained how, since the Communist collapse, Russia was now one big black market. Anyone could purchase passports, exit visas.

"Also, I have sympathetic 'official' friends who recommended me for grant, which I received for one year here at East-West Center."

The Center was part of the University of Hawai'i, an international think tank that attracted foreign scholars.

"This grant is to give series of lectures and finish 'book I am writing' on Rise and Fall of Cinema Engagé, political filmmaking in Europe in 1930s."

"Are you really writing such a book?"

"Impossible! Who would read such outmoded thing. This grant is subterfuge. Everything is subterfuge."

"Well,then...what happens when your year is up?"

"I go back to Russia, then leave again. Everyone is doing this. Though one day they will be cracking down when we get rid of that drunk, Yeltsin, and get decent president. Who, of course, they will then assassinate."

She noticed he kept switching from "we" to "they," perhaps the love/hate, pride/shame dilemma of being Russian.

"My dream? To one day be showing my films in Russia. Ninety-nine percent of Russians don't know what was done to us. TV is controlling all news. Is absolute power now, like Peter the Great. One television station reaching eleven time zones. One hundred million voters."

Ana began to feel overwhelmed by this man's "foreignness," his intensity.

"Is no more Russia now. Today, my country like big drag queen. All is 'let's pretend.'"

He explained how a colonel in the army, a man in charge of massive weapons, made a salary of only fifty dollars each month.

"He can destroy world, but cannot feed his family! Military officers begging in streets, but bureaucrats eat steaks. Russia now so corrupt, even gangsters begging for law and order. This the reason why we leave."

At the start of their conversation, she had been somewhat fascinated by how luxuriantly he rolled his r's, and how he lengthened his vowels so they seemed to quiver as if suspended from the end of an eye dropper. But when he became excited he seemed to mix his tenses and drop his articles, "a" and "the," so that his English became a caricature of a Russian speaking English.

Ana played with her food and studied his big, scarred hands, drawn in by his eyes, dark and beautiful, and wide, full lips, behind which lurked big crooked teeth that, miraculously, were not capped in gold or silver. She asked if he knew any of the recent Russian émigrés to Honolulu, most of whom lived in Iliwei over near the canneries.

"Da. Good people, but . . . not interested in my projects. They are trying to forget. To live barefoot in Paradise. Gospodi! What a joke."

"Why a joke?"

"Russians cannot assimilate. Unless you are Russian aristocrat, then is not really Russian. You can always spot us. Still blowing our noses in our hands. Forgetting how to button our flies. Ten years in new country, still dressing like refugees."

While they talked he had finished his sandwich, then stabbed each crumb left on the plate and licked them off his fingers. He had squeezed his tea bag almost to a pulp, stirred his tea and gulped it in one swallow. Then, during conversation, he put the tea bag to his lips and elaborately and audibly sucked it dry. She wondered if the tea bag thing were some sort of ritual.

"Look, Ana. While we talk, I have blown my nose in my napkin, then tore my napkin to shreds from sheer emotion. Next, I will ask if you
