## Theory

1. Prevention - ensuring that fires do not start by controlling and fuel sources.  
2. Communication - ensuring that if ignition occurs, the occupants are informed and any active fire safety systems are initiated.  
3. Escape - ensuring the occupants of the building and the surrounding areas can move to a place of safety before they are threatened by the smoke and heat.  
4. Containment - ensuring that the fire is contained to the smallest possible area limiting the amount of property likely to be damaged.  
5. Extinguishment - ensuring that the fire can be extinguished quickly and with minimal consequential damage to the old building.

Considering the five tactics in a logical sequence, the first is obviously prevention and only if this fails are the other tactics attempted. If the fire prevention is successful, the others need not be attempted; however as fire prevention will inevitably fail at some stage if the building is in use for long enough, provision must be made for the other tactics.

Communication by itself, even if totally successful, cannot save lives or protect property, but its key role in ensuring fire safety means it must be considered as one of the five tactics and it sits at the centre of the matrix in Figure 1.5. If communication is successful, then escape, active containment and extinguishment can be attempted, but if it is unsuccessful then only passive containment remains.

The success of escape will lead to life safety, its failure to death or injury. The success of extinguishment will lead to property protection and the limitation of damage, its failure to greater loss. The success of containment buys time for other tactics to be attempted; its failure leads to possible death, injury and greater damage.

These five tactics provide the fundamental framework within which the architect should be working. A building designed with adequate consideration given to these five factors will offer an acceptable level of fire safety. Each of the tactics will be the subject of one of the next five chapters, with consideration of the implementation of the tactic through the design process from inception to completion. The relationship between these fundamental fire safety tactics and the current legislation which architects have to comply with is an interesting one, and will be considered under the section on acceptability and equivalency.

This structure and the matrix were first published in the earliest edition of this book more than 20 years ago and it is interesting to see the extent to which they have been adopted in risk assessments, legislation and guidance (see Chapters 7 and 8).

## 1.2.3 Fire safety components

The fire safety components are the weapons the designer can use tactically to achieve life safety and property protection. They are the building itself, its

furniture, fittings and occupants. The number of components is limitless and depends solely on how they are categorised. It is not just the obvious (such as fire extinguishers) which must be included; everything from the wall coverings to the management practices may be relevant.

Each of the components may contribute to one or more of the five tactics, and it is this complexity of interaction which necessitates a logical approach to the tactics of fire safety. There will also be interactions between the objectives, the tactics and between any of the individual components. For this reason measures taken to reduce the fire risk or hazard cannot be viewed in isolation, and the overall impact must be considered.

For instance, the provision of sprinklers in a building to improve the property protection may reduce the risk of a fire growing beyond certain limits. This restriction in fire size and rate of subsequent fire growth should reduce the risk of structural failure and limit the amount of smoke produced. It should also increase the amount of time available for escape by containment of the fire. However, it will also probably reduce smoke temperature and this might increase the possibility of smoke logging. These problems of smoke control might result in an increased risk of life loss. There is also the risk that the sprinklers might not function properly and this might alter the risks to both life and property.

The fire safety decisions are therefore complex ones, and the designer has to be aware that changing one component or altering the emphasis placed on one tactic can have an effect on the probability of success in each objective. In the more complex designs it might be necessary to attempt to consider such interactions quantitatively, but for the vast majority of projects it is sufficient for the designer just to be aware of the possible implications of his or her decisions.

## 1.2.4 Acceptability and equivalency

Absolute safety from fire, where there is no risk whatsoever, is an ideal which it is impossible to achieve. The architect is never asked to provide such absolute safety, only to reduce the risks to property and people to a level which society regards as acceptable.

The acceptable level of safety has traditionally been defined through legislation. However, legislation tends to be produced as a response to particular problems or fires and it rarely offers a balanced or reasoned structure for determining safety. There is an argument that the whole history of fire safety legislation is simply a catalogue of responses to serious fires. It can be shown that not only is legislation enacted in response to disaster, but also that changes in building forms and technologies occur. A very obvious example followed the Bradford City football ground fire in 1985, when the Home Secretary announced within two days that the higher safety standards of larger football grounds were also going to be required at third and fourth division grounds, yet this was the first fire at a football ground in which a member of the public had died (and none has died since). Public reaction to the perceived risk demanded such action

and also within the two days six other football clubs had either closed stands or started to remove perimeter fences and provide exit gates. Yet these reactions were not based on any rigorous assessment of risk and the legislation did not form any part of a general or comprehensive strategy for a common level of fire safety in all buildings. The vast majority of people who die in fires die in their own dwellings (Table 1.1), yet because these are small incidents which rarely gain media coverage the standards of fire safety required in domestic buildings are possibly lower than all other buildings.

With much of the legislation related to fire safety being introduced responsively following particular tragedies, the existence of a coherent fire safety policy can be queried. Society is happy to accept as safe all buildings in which the dangers have not recently been exposed by a serious fire. Compliance with the regulations which are in force at one particular time is assumed to provide an acceptable level of fire safety, even though this level cannot be objectively quantified.

There are alternative ways of measuring safety other than showing compliance with legislative standards. It is possible to design against specified risk criteria, for example designing to ensure that the probability is of a single death occurring once every thousand years and a multiple death once every million years. It is also possible to design against specified probabilistic or deterministic risk criteria (e.g. to ensure that people within a building are able to reach a place of safety in a time less than that for fire conditions within the building to become untenable).

It is obvious that there is a point beyond which any increase in fire protection measures adds to the cost in undue proportion to the added safety provided. The fire safety designer must therefore achieve a balance between safety, economics and convenience. Acceptability must be discussed in view of the fact that absolute safety cannot be achieved and the law of diminishing returns, a cost safety benefit analysis.

Another important concept, closely linked to acceptability is equivalency. Once architects are able to achieve an agreed level of safety by whatever combination of tactics and combination they choose, then the importance of ensuring equivalency is critical. Equivalency between two different fire safety designs means they achieve the same level of safety by different methods. This is sometimes described as a "trade-off", the concept that one fire safety measure is being trade-off for another; for example does a concentration on fire escape enable the architect to pay less attention to fire extinguishments, or do measures installed to decrease the possibility of ignition balance a decrease in fire containment measures.

Attempts to assess equivalency in terms of a single numerical value are difficult and can hide a number of contradictions. For example, one might regard the presence of sprinklers as providing an additional level of safety which would permit an increased escape distance. This would then perhaps reduce the annual loss of life with an occasional larger loss, resulting from the 1 to 2 percent of fires where the sprinklers fail to operate due to human or mechanical

malfunction. A strategy for equivalence must recognise the distinction between average and societal risk. Calculations of equivalence are therefore neither simple nor easy to quantify; and for this reason, they are not normally explicitly incorporated in the legislative framework. The only one in common use in many national guidance documents is the relationship between increased compartment size where sprinklers are fitted in certain building types, as discussed in Chapter 5.

Much of the current building legislation is couched in terms of what is "adequate" or "reasonable" however; these terms are not defined except by reference to guidance documents which set out performance or prescriptive standards for how different tactics or components must be designed. There is no attempt to define either acceptable safety or a system of determining equivalency, yet by saying that the guidance documents constitute what is "adequate" or "reasonable", then any alternative fire safety strategy offering equivalent or better levels of safety should be welcomed. If designers are to be able to satisfy the objectives of fire safety without compromising other objectives (economics, aesthetics, functionality, sustainability), they need to be aware of the full range of different, but equivalent, fire safety strategies.

## 1.2.5 Traditional and fire engineering approaches to fire safety design

The traditional fire safety design approach has been to identify certain fire safety components and then to set prescriptive specifications for them which have to be achieved. These often included:

- travel distances and routes  
- loadbearing elements of the structure  
- roof construction  
- separating walls  
- compartment walls and compartment floors  
- protected shafts  
- concealed spaces and fire stopping  
- internal surfaces  
- stairways  
- staff training  
- fire service access  
- manual fire fighting equipment  
- detection and alarm systems  
- emergency signs and lighting.

Such an incremental approach has already been criticised for limiting the design choice of architects, giving no guidance on acceptability and not helping in any calculation of equivalency. However, the most serious criticism of such an approach is the total neglect of some aspects of fire safety. Fire prevention is

hardly mentioned and smoke control rarely gets the attention that it deserves. The traditional approach was to regard all these components of fire safety as somehow independent and to demand a prescribed standard of provision in each of them. This limits the design flexibility of the architect and can lead to resentment of the legislation. Often the architect will start to seek loopholes or ways to get around the standards. Such an approach guarantees that designers and the statutory authorities will be in opposition to each other.

The traditional approach also creates an artificial distinction between the requirements of the legislation which will concentrate on life safety and those of the building's insurers which will be more concerned with property protection. Yet most fire safety measures will contribute to some degree to both life safety and property protection. The artificial separation of the two can lead to examples of both area of overlap and gaps. Conflict can even be generated by the differing priorities of the legislation and the insurers: in one major shopping centre in England the insurers offered a reduced premium if the mall was sprinklered, but due to the geometry this would have increased the life risk and had to be declined.

The alternative approach to fire safety can be described as the fire engineering approach, and it is the one underlying this book. In this, the building is considered as a complex system with the fire safety design just one of the many interrelated subsystems. The architect is faced with designing not simply to satisfy a series of prescriptive standards, but to achieve an acceptable standard of fire safety. This will require an assessment of the equivalence of alternative fire safety strategies and the development of an integrated approach to fire safety. In the fire engineering approach, issues like fire prevention and fire communications can be given their due weight and the designer can fully exploit all the techniques of improving fire safety. The fire engineering approach demands an understanding by the designer of the fundamentals of fire safety, but it offers the opportunity to attempt unconventional ways of achieving compliance with the level of fire safety required by law. All that designers are required to do is prove that what they are offering represents a level of fire safety equivalent to what has been defined as the acceptable level.

The fire engineering approach will begin with the recognition of the objectives of fire safety, life safety and property protection. Then the fire safety design must be prepared on the basis of an assessment of the risks and the ways these can be mitigated to an acceptable level. Chapter 7 considers the principles of risk assessment and Chapter 2 examines the specific ignition sources and fuel limitation. Chapters 3 to 6 cover the other four tactics and their potential for communications, escape, containment and extinguishment to balance the residual risks.

Such an assessment of risks and precautions may be either quantitative or qualitative. Quantitative assessments are many and varied (e.g. fire growth modelling, smoke modelling, structural models, probabilistic analysis, structural response modelling, environmental testing and extrapolation of results, deterministic calculations, stochastic evaluation, fault tree, event tree and critical

path analysis). Unfortunately, at present such methods are too complex in form and too limited in scope to be of significant value in most building projects. There have been steady improvements over the last 20 years, but there is still an absence of clear comprehensive models which bring together all the aspects of a fire safety design in an easily accessible and useable form which can be integrated into the design process. Therefore often the architects are reliant on qualitative techniques which rely on an expert-based assessment of risk.

This book is structured around the fire engineering approach to fire safety and each of the following chapters addresses one of the five tactics available to the architect in preparing a fire safety design. Although, sadly, it is not yet possible to offer a simple quantitative system which would permit the full study of the equivalency of alternative proposals, an understanding of the fundamentals will assist the architect in making informed judgements on equivalency and the acceptability of proposed fire safety measures.

For architects and designers the hope must be that developments in fire science and engineering will steadily improve the legislation on buildings so that it becomes a coherent and comprehensive set of fire safety standards and enable the equivalency of alternative strategies for compliance to be easily assessed. Designers should be asked to achieve levels of safety defined in terms of risk to people and property, rather than in the prescriptive standards of compartment size, door widths or travel distances. Throughout this book, and in any approach to fire safety based on first principles, architects must consider fire safety in this manner.

## Chapter 2

# Prevention

The simplest and most effective tactic available to the architect to ensure fire safety is to prevent fires starting, namely fire prevention. If this tactic is successful, then there is no need even to attempt any other fire safety measures. There are two ways of preventing fires and they are related to the fundamental "triangle of fire", outlined in Chapter 1. The three elements of the triangle are an ignition source, a fuel and a supply of oxygen, and as it is almost impossible, and most undesirable, to exclude oxygen from a habitable building, fire prevention has to concentrate on the other two elements. Ignition prevention and the limitation of the fuel available are the twin methods of fire prevention. There is also a minor role for the architect in ensuring that the plans for the fire safety management of the building are properly prepared, and this will be considered at the end of the chapter.

## 2.1 Ignition prevention

In designing to reduce ignition the architect has to do two things: first to design out the predictable ignition hazards or sources; and secondly, to enable the building to be managed in such a way that the potential for ignition is eliminated. The actual design against the hazard and the design to permit management of the hazard must be seen together.

The first necessity for the designer is an understanding of the most likely ignition hazards in the particular building type under consideration: it is essential to know your enemy if you are going to win. There are four basic classes of ignition:

1. natural phenomena (eg lightning)  
2. human carelessness (eg smoking materials, matches, cooking)  
3. technological failure (eg electrical wiring and appliance faults)  
4. deliberate fire-raising (eg vandalism, suicide, insurance fraud).

These four categories are not mutually exclusive and technological failure, in particular, is normally in part the result of human carelessness, technology alone

most dramatic manner. Earthquakes are also major fire risks through the damage they can cause to gas and electricity supplies, and fire is the consequent problem in earthquake areas. Forest fires are also an additional natural hazard for buildings adjoining or surrounded by large areas of woodland. In extreme situations, buildings may even be threatened by volcanic activity. However, in the United Kingdom the only major concern is lightning, and all architects should be aware of how to design against this hazard.

The average lightning flash normally lasts for less than a thousandth of a second, but during this time a vast quantity of electrical energy is dissipated to the earth (perhaps a current of 10,000-100,000A and a voltage of many millions of volts). The lightning stroke may even be repeated over the same path two or three times within a couple of seconds. Lightning damages buildings as the current passes through building materials or along crevices between them, and energy is dissipated with the heat reacting to the water content of the materials to produce very hot gases.

The buildings most at risk are those at high altitudes, on hilltops or hillsides, in isolated positions, and, of course, those with tall towers or chimneys. Designers must ensure that buildings at risk are provided with lightning-conductor systems which will dissipate the shock directly to the ground. The finials of the lightning conductor need to be mounted on the highest point of the building and they have to be linked to the ground by a "down conductor", normally of copper tape. This should be attached to the outside face of the building, and at ground level the down conductor needs to be linked to an earth termination (normally a copper rod drive some $3\mathrm{m}$ into the ground, or a copper plate buried below the surface).

Experience shows that a lightning conductor on a tall building will protect everything within a cone extending around the building for a distance equivalent to the height of the conductor finials (sometimes described as a "bell tent protection"). Buildings or parts of buildings, outside or reaching above this cone will need their own protection. It has to be stressed that lightning is one of the most complex of natural phenomena and some of its manifestations are still far from fully understood. It is tragic that it was York Minster which suffered so badly in 1984, when, at the time, it had one of the best lightning protection systems of any cathedral in England.

## 2.1.2 Human carelessness

Probably the most common cause of ignition, and certainly the hardest to design against, is human carelessness. Almost all fires started by smoking materials or matches could be avoided, yet these are one of the major causes of domestic fires and consequent loss of life. Similarly, the continuing high incidence of fires concerned with cookers and stoves are normally due to human carelessness. Issues of public education and the encouragement of safety in the home are beyond the remit of this book, but there are some contributions the designer can make - the simplest, on electric cookers, being not to site the master switch behind the

cooker, but to one side and in an accessible position. Changing social attitudes and behaviour can make a huge difference and in the last 20 years the decline in the making of chips in deep fat fryers in the home has definitely led to a reduction in deaths and injuries.

In non-domestic buildings there is even more the architect can do in, most significantly, the provision of adequate storage space. Insufficient badly sited storage will inevitably mean that the workers within a building will start to store goods in corridors, kitchens or wherever it is easiest for them. This may well bring potential fuel into proximity with potential ignition sources and in addition might block circulation spaces that will be needed for fire escape. For example, in hospitals it is highly dangerous if staff start to store flammable materials (such as linen or disposable bedpans) in areas with an ignition hazard (such as kitchens or treatment rooms).

In many developed countries there are now restrictions on smoking in public buildings with staff required to go outside to smoking shelters or just the street. This obviously reduces the risk of ignition, unless there is a culture of illicit smoking within the building with staff finding unfrequented and hidden areas in which to smoke surreptitiously. This used to be a serious problem in storage and distribution buildings. Smoking remains a major ignition source in domestic buildings, but here there is little opportunity for the designer to play any role in reducing the risk.

It is essential that in designing the layout of the building the architect has an awareness of how it will be used in practice and at least makes a guess at how it will be misused. Areas with a high ignition hazard (e.g. kitchens) should be placed as far as convenient from areas with a high life or property risk (e.g. bedrooms or special store rooms). This simple method of ignition prevention can similarly be applied to domestic buildings where the biggest ignition risks are the kitchen and the living room (probably highest smoking risk), while the biggest life risks are the bedrooms. The architect should ensure that the escape routes from the bedrooms are not jeopardised by passing through the living or kitchen areas. The siting of rubbish areas and skips is equally important as they are very common sources of ignition (Figure 2.1).

## 2.1.3 Technological failure

Ignitions resulting from technological failure are even more the responsibility of the designer and need to be consciously considered during the planning process. Just as perfect fire safety is unobtainable, so it is inevitable that all building services and systems will fail. The architect must ensure that such failure is predictable, controllable and repairable.

In the layout of the building the architect must be aware of the areas which pose the greatest hazard in the event of technological failure and design to minimise the consequences that would result from such ignition. Areas such as plant-rooms, laboratories, boiler-houses and large kitchens need to be sited where their threat is minimised. The separation within a building of those areas

## 2.1.4 Deliberate fire-raising

It is often very difficult to prove to the satisfaction of a court of law that a fire was deliberately started, and many fires which probably were deliberate do not appear as such in the statistics. There are five main categories of deliberate fires, some easier to design against than others. They may be started for financial gain or to conceal a crime, or as malicious vandalism, casual vandalism or as terrorist acts.

Fires for financial gain include those lit by the owners or occupiers, the classic insurance frauds, or attempts to resolve a company's financial problems by destroying plant or buildings. Alternatively, the fire may be started by an outsider or competitor who stands to gain from the destruction of the buildings or company. As such fires are likely to be carefully planned, it is almost impossible for the architect to design against them; anyone who is determined to burn down a building will eventually succeed, especially if they already have an intimate knowledge of the layout and construction. Fire-raisers are likely to want to conceal their crime as an accident, therefore the only defence the architect can offer is to eliminate the opportunities for accidental fires (as in the previous section).

Again, there is little the architect can do in the design to prevent fires which are stated to conceal a crime. Someone who wishes to hide the traces of a murder or burglary by burning down the building will not be deterred. However, it is most likely he or she will be caught as unplanned fires very rarely succeed in destroying the evidence.

Unfortunately, fires started by acts of malicious vandalism are not uncommon and the classic example is of groups or individuals who attempt to gain revenge by starting fires, perhaps the dismissed worker who, rightly or wrongly, has a grievance against an employer and decides to take revenge. As with fires ignited for financial gain, it is probable that such a fire-raiser will have a good knowledge of the building and the working practices, so there is little the designer can do to prevent such fires.

The statistics show that a significant number of fires in Great Britain which appear to have been ignited as a result of casual vandalism have grown to cause major damage. These are distinct from acts of malicious vandalism, because there is less intent to destroy and less planning of the fire. This is particularly true of school fires, which in some cases have led to the destruction of the entire school. The architect can do much to reduce the risk of such fires by controlling access to the building or to particular areas of the building.

There are three lines of defence (Figure 2.2) around a building: first, the perimeter of the site; second, the building face; and third, the divisions between different parts of the building. Obviously the amount of damage a fire causes will increase as each of these lines of defence is breached. At the first line of defence, it is desirable to have some form of hedge, fence or barrier, and permitted entrances should be marked by at least symbolic gateways. Good lighting can also play an important role in reducing the risk of unauthorised access.

greater impact the architect can have is in the control of access to the building. The decision to include underground car parking is an example of a bad design decision which led to costly additional anti-terrorist measures at the Scottish Parliament, especially after the Westminster parliament had already experienced a fatal car bomb in such a location.

## 2.2 Fuel limitation

Fuel limitation, like ignition prevention, is determined by the success both of design and management measures. It is most definitely an area where the architect can play a significant role: though unless the building is managed and used as intended by the briefing and design teams, it will be impossible for fire prevention measures to work most efficiently. It is hard to separate design from management and, for this reason, they will be considered together.

Limitation of the amount of fuel available will help reduce the dangers of fire in two ways. First, by controlling the amount of material which will be able to burn and release heat to feed the growth of the fire. This is described as the fire load of the fuel. Second, it will control the amount of smoke which can be produced. The amount of potential fuel which will burn to produce smoke is often described as the smoke load, and this may be different from the fuel load, depending on the smoke generating characteristics of the material involved. It is possible for a fuel to have a low smoke load and a high fire load, or vice versa. Two types of potential fuel are specified by the architect: the building fabric and the building's contents.

## 2.2.1 Building fabric

One of the problems for the architect is the plethora of terms used to describe the fire safety of materials. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to define a material as simply safe or unsafe, for it is necessary to know a little more about the conditions under which it is safe. Architects have to be wary of manufacturers who simply assure them that a material has a fire certificate, it is essential to know what the certificate is for and what that actually means. The confusion which can result from the failure to comprehend the differences in fire safety terms can be clearly seen in such terms as "ignitability" and "fire propagation": although materials might be treated to make them hard to ignite from a small source (ignitability), such treatments may not affect their rate of burning (fire propagation) once ignited.

The essential characteristics of building materials which can be measured (Figure 2.3) and which the architect should be aware of are:

1. Ignitability - the ease with which a material can be ignited when subjected to a flame.  
2. Combustibility - whether or not a material will burn when subjected to heat from an already existing fire.
