the don't remember it. Possible answer: Margot's past experience might be considered a "crime" to the others because she is able to remember something they wish they could remember. They are probably jealous.

p. 123 Reading Strategy: Students should circle the following: Margot's parents are thinking of moving back to earth. The children probably hate her for this because they are jealous.  
p. 123 Reading Check: Margot came to Venus five years ago, when she was four. She came from Earth.  
p. 124 Reading Strategy: Students should circle the following words: protesting, pleading, and crying. The other children are mean.  
p. 124 Stop to Reflect: Students should explain what they think will happen to Margot.  
p. 124 Literary Analysis: Students should circle the jungle burned with sunlight. The correct answer is (b) thick rain forest.  
p. 125 Reading Check: She cries because the raindrop means the sunlight is ending and the rain will start again soon.  
p. 126 Stop to Reflect: Students will probably say that she will feel very angry and sad.

## Review and Assess

1. For seven years, it has rained constantly.  
2. she is from Earth and remembers the sun; are mean to her; regret.  
3. The correct answer is (b).  
4. Students should check the following: Children can be mean to one another; Outsiders are often treated badly; If you are mean, you may regret it later.  
5. 1. "Sometimes there were light showers; sometimes there were heavy storms; but always there was rain." 2. "She doesn't play games with the other children in the echoing tunnels of their underground city." 3. "It was the color of flaming bronze and it was very large. And the sky around it was a blazing blue tile color."  
6. Similarities: Margot and her classmates
1. live on Venus 2. are nine years old
3. are eager to see the sun

Differences: 1. Margot remembers the sun. Her classmates do not remember the sun. 2. She has been living on Venus for only five years. Her classmates have been living on Venus their entire lives. 3. Margot did not get to see the sun because she was locked away in a closet. Her classmates went out and played in the sun.

## The Highwayman

p. 131 Reading Check: Students should write night on the line. Then, they should circle the following text: The highways, or roads, had many inns where travelers stopped at night. Sometimes travelers were held up by robbers called highwaymen.  
p. 131 Stop to Reflect: Students should circle (a). The details that point to the answer are a French cocked-hat, a bunch of lace at his chin, a coat of claret velvet, breeches of brown doeskin, and a jeweled twinkle.  
p. 132 Literary Analysis: He's probably jealous and dislikes the highwayman. He might try to get the highwayman in trouble.  
p. 132 Reading Strategy: The highwayman has probably robbed someone.  
p. 133 Literary Analysis: Students should circle the following: they gag Bess and tie her to her bed by the window. They tie a gun called a musket to her, with the barrel below her heart.  
p. 133 Read Fluently: The correct answer is (c).  
p. 134 Literary Analysis: The following words add to the suspense: Nearer he came and nearer!: Her eyes grew wide for a moment: she drew one last deep breath. Students might wonder if Bess will be able to let the highwayman know that the soldiers are after him.  
p. 134 Literary Analysis: He wants to go back to fight the soldiers because of what they did to Bess. Students should circle the following: he spurred like a madman: with white road smoking behind him and his rapier brandished high.  
p. 134 Reading Check: Bess shot herself while trying to sound off a gun shot to warn the highwayman that the soldiers were after him.
