also displayed were Abdullah, De Reske, Passing Clouds and Churchman's, my father's favourite. Cigarettes were also sold loose, a choice of Virginian, Turkish, Egyptian or Russian.

As a smoker my father was unadventurous, but he was fond of mentioning that he had enjoyed French cigarettes during his time across the Channel. This "time" was in fact a day trip to Boulogne while on holiday in Folkestone in 1912, but he came back from it an authority on everything French, and later in my life, after I had lived in France for some years, he was still informing me on the subject of French habits and customs. Apart from snide remarks about snails and frogs' legs his major denunciation, often repeated, concerned shared men's and women's toilet facilities in French cafés. Eventually I pointed out to him that this was equally the case on British corridor trains, whether or not they were taking passengers to or from France. He replied that this was irrelevant, and appealed to my mother for support, but this was declined on the grounds that it was an indelicate subject. My father hurriedly walked out, uncharacteristically speechless. The only other time I ever saw him similarly lost for words was when I questioned him about the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England, into which I had been dipping at the back of my prayer book during a dull sermon.

Hardham's was among the few local shops that had a sign over its door saying "You May Telephone from Here". Telephones were still few and far between in shops and even rarer in private houses, and were considered essential only for professional offices. There

were not yet public call boxes on the streets or at the local railway stations. I overheard my Uncle Joe telling a neighbour that Hardham's probably needed their phone to support an under-the-counter sideline of taking bets, which were then allowed to be placed only at racecourses or by mail or telephone to a bookmaker.

The lady florist, whose shop was next door, also cultivated a lengthy strip of garden alongside the rail track close to Woodside station, and was said to have served in the Women's Land Army during the war. She wore men's breeches, and had the reputation of being the rudest shopkeeper for miles around, until her manner changed for the better and she took to wearing skirts. Opinions at home and among our neighbours were divided as to which was the cause, and which the effect, of this transformation.

\* \* \*

Soon after I was first taken to the High Street, a branch of Sainsbury's opened there. In those days, long prior to its supermarket involvement, Sainsbury's sold only "perishables", with a strong emphasis on meat, poultry and provisions, and no groceries or packaged foods. For some reason that has always puzzled me, the meat section of their stores sold only mutton, lamb and pork, but not beef. Visits to the High Street branch always appealed to me for the framed prints of fancy poultry on its walls. My Uncle Joe told me that they were the work of Ludlow, the great Victorian portrayer of domestic livestock. Later on I collected and treasured some of

these prints when they were included in issues of Feathered World, which became my favourite weekly, as I disdained children's comics almost as soon as I could read.

The High Street fishmonger was a Greek whose name was Balumi, who came from Salonika. To the conventionally accepted range available in the other fish shops he added fresh salmon, pilchards and sardines, then normally sold only tinned. He was an enthusiastic salesman and persistently extolled the tastiness of local freshwater fish such as carp, perch and pike, but apparently with little effect on the conservative habits of his customers.

Later, when I was at school in Croydon, I got to know his son, who was about my age. He showed me how to catch crayfish in the shallow pools of an abandoned gravel pit. He dropped in fish heads for bait and then doused them with an aniseed cordial. When the crayfish gathered to feed they were easily but cautiously picked off, wrapped in water weed and consigned to a sack. His father paid him twopence each for his catch, to be sold in the shop. I took some home for my mother to cook, but she rejected them as "vermin".

In adult life, my neighbours in rural Provence, where crayfish are highly esteemed, employed a similar strategy with a sheep's head and a bottle of pastis. Half the contents of the bottle enveloped the bait, the other half serving to sustain the patience of the fisher. As pastis becomes cloudy on contact with water, the hands needed the protection of stout gloves while groping for the catch.

During the middle years of my childhood -- I think about 1925 -- a branch of Woolworth's appeared in the High Street. In those days everything they sold was priced at either threepence or sixpence, and the range of choice was amazingly vast, indeed even wider than it became after the abandonment of the limitation. In some few instances it was craftily sidestepped, as for example, by pairs of "gem-set" cufflinks priced each one of the pair separately.

Woolworth's were then far ahead of Marks & Spencers, whose stores seemed dowdy and unenterprising in choice of merchandise, despite a much higher price limit of three shillings.

At the larger Woolworth branch in central Croydon, I saw and heard for the first time a speak-your-weight slot machine. These became very popular for a time, and their disappearance after only a year or so seems surprising. My mother disapproved of them vehemently, claiming that it was an infringement of her privacy for her weight to be announced to "all and sundry" who might be within earshot. Perhaps she was expressing a prevailing public disquiet which brought about their demise.

\* \* \*

The High Street ended at the clock tower, a miniature version of Westminster's Big Ben. Its counterpart I later discovered at the centre of Victoria, the capital of the Seychelles in the Indian Ocean, where I resided for several years. Continuing beyond the clock tower, the

uninteresting Selhurst Road, served by elderly and noisy trams, eventually reached West Croydon station. The Croydon tram network was municipally owned and was said to incur heavy operating losses, that were greatly increased whenever track needed re-laying due to road resurfacing. The trams were long overdue for replacement, and while I was still at school a fleet of trolley buses took over from them.

Facing the clock tower was the South Norwood Police Station, where my father sometimes called in to see old friends from his wartime service with the Special Constabulary. His regular duty on the night watch had been to guard a lonely footpath subway under the railway against sabotage by enemy agents. Armed only with a truncheon, a police whistle and a bicycle lamp, it seems improbable that he would have been able to foil a prepared and determined assault. When I was with him I might be taken to see the horses stabled at the rear if they were not on patrol, as they usually were on a Saturday if there was a game at the nearby Crystal Palace football ground. Every big match played there was preceded by the spectators singing the hymn "Abide With Me", led by a conductor. Why this particular hymn alone, and no other, I wondered? Whatever the custom's origin, it has endured to be still lingering on at the century's end. Although I was never interested in the game I felt a natural allegiance to the Palace club, then far down in the league, which greatly amused my Uncle Joe, who supported Millwall, then at the top of it.

To the left of the clock tower was Station Road, the short approach to Norwood Junction. It was said that

before it became a junction, with a branch line to the Crystal Palace, the station was called Jolly Sailor, and a public house of this name, from which it was borrowed, still existed in the High Street.

On one corner of Station Road was a paint shop on which the rainbow-hued fascia announced its owner as Euan Tudball, Colourman. When I was reading the Sherlock Holmes stories later on, I imagined that he had drawn this description of his trade from "The Adventure of the Retired Colourman", until I learnt that it was because he had been a colour sergeant in the Army. When my Grandfather Silverwood came to stay with us he used to take me in with him to see Mr Tudball, a fellow enthusiast with whom he engaged in animated discussions about pigments, linseed oils and varnishes. To alleviate his defective hearing, Mr Tudball carried an ivory ear trumpet, hanging from a cord around his neck when not in use. Deafness was much more prevalent then than later on, or probably it was more evident before the introduction of electronic hearing aids. Elderly folk were commonly presumed to be more or less deaf, and were spoken to loudly and slowly, which must have been irritating to those whose hearing was not in fact impaired.

On the opposite corner was an architectural ironmongery stocked with elaborate fittings that were presumably in demand for the large houses on South Norwood Hill. It was run by a Mrs Halestrap, a widow who was renowned as a locksmith. On one occasion when I was taken there by my Grandmother Hutchings for a key to be cut, Mrs Halestrap lifted me on to a tall

safe and asked me what was the first thing I would do if I wanted to open it and I had no key? I guessed at the lockpick, then at a charge of explosive, but both answers were wrong. "The first thing is to check whether it's locked," she said. "That's something useful to be remembered all your life -- not because it's a safe, but because the answer applies to many other problems you'll encounter in everyday life."

Along one side leading to the station most of the premises were occupied by solicitors and accountants. There was also an estate agent called Burcote, claiming to be "also at Sackville Street, Piccadilly, London W1". Its particulars of properties for sale were displayed in the window on cards mounted on miniature easels. This was then the only estate agency in the district, as in those days almost all the houses, other than the large ones on South Norwood Hill, were rented.

Next door was the Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages. Standing at the kerb outside there was usually a grim-faced, shabbily dressed man bearing a large board scrawled with a lengthy message that had weathered to become almost unreadable. He was said to be protesting at the lack or loss of his birth registration. My father once advised him to apply to the Central Registry at Somerset House in London. "I've spent years campaigning there too, but they ignore me," he replied. "You see, they're a party to the conspiracy!"

When I first knew Station Road a large building on the other side was the headquarters of Payne & Birdseye, haulage contractors with horse-drawn vehicles, but it was later demolished to be replaced by a cinema.

Although modest in comparison with many built during the postwar years, it was such an improvement on the old Portland Road cinemas that we were encouraged to hope that my mother could be persuaded to give it a trial. For as long as I could remember she had refused to set foot in one because, she insisted, it would give her a headache, or in her own words, "bring on one of my heads". As it turned out, the new one transformed her attitude. A severe thunderstorm during a shopping expedition with Aunt May drove them to shelter in its vestibule. When my mother complained of feeling faint, the doorman escorted them to seats just inside the auditorium. The film in progress was an instalment of the then-popular serial "The Perils of Pauline". My mother's faintness recovered and she became so engrossed that she returned to see the next episode, and thereafter was a confirmed cinemagoer.

The nearest big cinemas were in central Croydon, where the Davis opened when I was at school nearby. It was then reputed to be the largest in Europe, and was among the first to have a café, a Wurlitzer organ mounted on an ascending podium, and to stage variety acts between films. The New Victoria at London's Elephant and Castle challenged its claim to size, but for both of them a vast auditorium provided serious acoustic problems when sound films were introduced in 1927.

\* \* \*

At the side of the station building was the entrance to the goods yard, and here was the office of our coal merchants, Moger & Company. When we went there to

place an order it was recorded in a great leather-bound ledger, and again when the account was settled. On the counter were samples in small black dishes that I was told were carved from coal. I can recall only Derby Brights, Tyne Main and Tilmanstone Nuggets -- the latter from the Kent coalfield, as my mother told me proudly.

Inside the goods yard there was an enclosed parking area for coster barrows, which were let out to the street-market traders and to itinerant rag-and-bone and scrap-metal collectors. I wondered for a time why those who used them always pushed from the front end rather than from the back, where there were handles, until my father explained that the barrows were originally intended to be donkey-drawn, the handles being cut-down vestiges of the shafts. Consequently, to push from the rear would involve lifting the handles and the weight of the load, whereas from the front it required only downward pressure. I never saw a donkey-drawn barrow locally, although they were still a familiar sight along the Mile End Road when we visited our relatives in the East End. Wagons drawn by mule teams were also to be seen there plying to and from the London Docks, but I never saw them elsewhere. An exotic sight locally were period-style "way out West" covered wagons drawn by oxen, that I used to see occasionally delivering to Liptons and some other retailers in the High Street. Wagon and team were represented on packets of Atora beef suet as its trade mark, and my mother refused to believe me that I ever encountered them in reality.

In a kiosk on the station forecourt a jobbing printer plied his craft with a small treadle-operated press. My

mother took me there once to order labels for her apple jelly, for which the recipe came from my godfather's housekeeper. She took pride in presenting it to friends and neighbours in glass jam jars, of which the supply was limited as most were then of stoneware. The greatly admired rosy colour of the jelly was due less to the fruit than to the addition of cochineal powder. She was briefly disconcerted when my Uncle Wally commented that this was prepared from ground insects, but recovered her composure when reminded that he was a confirmed legpuller.

The Norwood Junction platforms were provided with slot machines, as were most railway stations at that time. There were scent machines that offered tiny phials of Californian Poppy, Jockey Club or Ashes of Roses. Chocolate vending machines offered penny bars of Cadbury's milk and Rowntree's plain, or thicker bars of Fry's nut-milk for twopence. On the downline platform from London there was also a machine vending a Scottish nougat bar called My Queen. My Grandfather Silverwood always brought me one of these when he came to see us. I disliked it because it was sweet and sticky, but I didn't like to tell him so.

The only other confectionery product I ever came across in a vending machine was the Swiss chocolate Toblerone in its characteristic triangular section bars. The sole machine was oddly sited in a country lane on the Isle of Wight against a hedgerow bounding a meadow, distant from houses or shops and from the nearest crossroads or turning. Why there, I wondered? Many years later, as an adult, I encountered a Toblerone

marketing executive and mentioned my curiosity to him. He was equally puzzled and took the trouble to phone his head office in Switzerland. The archivist in charge of its house museum there could find no record that the product had ever been available in vending machines, anywhere.

Weighing machines were sited on almost every station platform, and there was also one chained to the wall outside our local chemist shop. My mother distrusted it and instead took me into the shop to be weighed non-mechanically, which involved a calibrated scale with a sliding balance to be adjusted by hand.

Also at Norwood Junction, and at some other stations at which travellers might need to wait for a connection, there was a slot machine for embossing name-plates on metal strips. A dial had letters and figures around its rim, a centrally pivoted pointer to select them, and a lever to activate the embossing punch. A penny provided 25 punches, and another would be required if the text needed any more. To complete the operation, another lever delivered the finished product, rounded neatly at each end, with holes provided to affix it. I punched my name on this machine on several occasions, but never found a use for the results. Another occasional platform slot machine provided penny-worths of electric shocks: "Safe, invigorating electrotherapy for all ages -- insert coin".

It was on the Norwood Junction platforms that I first noticed the porters wearing waistcoats with attached sleeves, but no jackets, which was the general practice on the railways, although unknown otherwise. Waistcoats

were essential components of the three-piece suit, and style-conscious wearers left the lowest button undone, a custom said to have been established by the Prince of Wales. The tailoring trade tried to popularise double-breasted waistcoats after the war, but with little success, as their wear soon became associated with "bounders", as did the early introduction of suede shoes. Bounders were individuals who transgressed the accepted code of their class, however harmlessly, whereas cads were those guilty of positively antisocial behaviour. This censorious use of the word "cad" was relatively recent, as earlier in the century it was the vernacular term for a bus conductor, and both my grandfathers still used it in that sense.

My Hutchings grandparents came to stay with us for a while when they were house-hunting. They had decided to uproot from the East End when grandfather retired and to live in our district, "but essentially within sight of the Crystal Palace," he insisted. He was a devotee of the Palace, and was proud to have been born in 1851, the year it was constructed for the Great Exhibition in Hyde Park.

On most fine afternoons during their stay I went out with my grandmother as she searched for a suitable dwelling. On the first of these expeditions she hesitated as we left the house, so I boldly set off to the right instead of in my mother's habitual direction to Portland Road. For a few paces I feared a recall, but then we were safely on our way to the unexplored and hitherto forbidden Albert Road.

My initial impression as we turned the corner was that it was more like a country lane than a suburban thoroughfare. Bounded by trees on each side, the road was downhill into the middle distance and then rose steeply to be lost from sight in the wooded heights of Upper Norwood, crowned by the Crystal Palace.

Opposite the end of our road there was an extensive area of farmland, that later in the century was saved from

development to become a nature reserve. Along its boundary was a bridleway and footpath leading to the Elmer's End neighbourhood of Beckenham. Nobody I asked could tell me who Elmer had been, or how he came to his end there.

Beyond the farm were some ancient flint-walled cottages and then a few shops. The first of them was the corn chandler's to which my invited visit with Wally Millward had been denied. This was meagrely stocked and compared unfavourably with Sanders Brothers in Portland Road.

Albert Road's only grocery never failed to arouse my curiosity. It was in a perpetual state of chaos, with unpacked crates and hampers littering the floor and the windows piled with discarded cartons. Despite this uninviting disarray, the business survived, with no evidence of any effort to reform to tidier habits.

My grandmother described it as a "rogue shop". I have since come across others of the same kind elsewhere, and they all had an undeniably wilful appeal. For several years after the Second World War, a rogue pharmacy survived in London's Soho, its eccentric owner becoming increasingly dishevelled and unkempt. When I asked once for aspirin tablets there he looked bewildered, saying, "I suppose I must have them somewhere, but I've no idea where I could have put them." Perhaps his business survived on illicit transactions, since he appeared to attract little legitimate trade.

A Chinese laundry with exotic characters painted on its fascia was the only one in the district, and indeed one

of the only two that I have ever encountered in England, the other in the Midlands town of Walsall. Odd this, considering the enduring currency of the phrase "like a Chinese laundry ticket", to refer to an indecipherable written message.

There was only one public house in the road, an imposing corner building named The Albert Tavern. It was bombed during the Second World War and was later demolished and replaced by a less distinguished structure which claimed to support two cricket teams of which the members and their supporters congregated in separate bars. Whenever we passed the Tavern, the same anxious-looking, raggedly dressed man was standing on the corner opposite the entrance. "Doubtless he's waiting for anyone he knows who can be persuaded to invite him inside," said my grandmother. She added that he, and many others like him, were probably widowers living on sufferance in the homes of married daughters or daughters-in-law, and were turned out of the house every day after breakfast to get them "from under my feet" and "out of the way".

Further on were the byres and yard of Sait's dairy, with grazing meadows for the cows beyond. Hens providing the shop's eggs foraged in the yard, still the prewar favourite breeds, Black Minorcas and Buff Orpingtons, soon to be displaced in popularity by White Leghorns and Rhode Island Reds. The advent of nondescript-looking hybrid strains was far into the future, when most hens would be banished from farmyards and confined in batteries.
