from them unless you want to humiliate them and unless you do not care if you make enemies."

In talking of China to colleagues he stressed the country's tremendous needs, especially in every form of communication from roads to radios. His interest, as a friend said, "was in what China could develop into." He believed that the current effort in civil reform would permit "the thorn of extrality to be removed from her side" and he persuaded himself intermittently that the new Government might really succeed in modernizing China and mobilizing her potential. "With the right direction," he would say, "four hundred million people with their working and manufacturing ability will dominate and we'd better be with 'em."

While at Benning his notes show that he read--though disappointingly without comment--the historic document that marked the beginning of China's new travail. This was the Report of the Lytton Commission of the League of Nations on the Manchurian crisis, the event whose train of consequences was to engulf the world.

On September 18, 1931, the Japanese Kwantung Army, using the arranged pretext of a bomb explosion on the tracks of the South Manchurian Railway, seized Mukden in "self-defense," and spread out swiftly to the military occupation of Manchuria. The move was a larger successor to the murder of Chang Tso-lin in 1928, and this time accomplished its purpose. It was precipitated by Chiang Kai-shek's efforts in 1929, in collaboration with the patriotic Young Marshal, Chang Hseuh-liang, to re-impose Chinese sovereignty over Manchuria. Directed first at Russian control of the Chinese Eastern Railway, China's challenge had provoked instant retaliation by Soviet troops ending in the defeat and humiliation of the Chinese--and alarm to the Japanese. The revival of both Chinese and Russian pretensions determined the Japanese military, who were the expansionist force in the nation, to consolidate Japan's "special position" in Manchuria. Operating on the principle of direct access to the Emperor which allowed them to act independently of civilian control, the military acting through the Kwantung Army engineered the Mukden Incident, raising issues of tremendous import at home, in China and, in view of the Washington Treaties and the Covenant of the League of Nations, in the West.

When the attack came Chiang Kai-shek's military energies were absorbed in the third of his extermination campaigns against the Communists. Moreover, the country was suffering from a disastrous flood of the Yangtze which left thousands of square miles inundated, two million dead and countless destitute. No attempt to organize military resistance in Manchuria was made. On the contrary, Chiang Kai-shek ordered Chang Hsueh-liang who

had 400,000 men under arms both south and north of the Great Wall "resolutely" to follow a policy of "non-resistance." Though his troops were numerically superior, he knew they were no match for the Japanese in training or armament and he preferred a strategic retreat to a military showdown with Japan. His guiding principle was to let nothing deter him from his main purpose of eliminating internal rivals.

Chiang had made up his mind that "pacification" must come before everything; before social and political reform or resistance to the invader. If there was one thing that could qualify Chiang for greatness, it was the fixity with which he gripped and held a conviction, once formed. Against the Japanese he could use China's eternal advantage, her infinite room to retreat, while concentrating on his aim of uniting the country under Kuomintang rule. When this was accomplished China could cope with the Japanese; meantime Manchuria, presumably, would satisfy them.

History is the unfolding of miscalculations, and Chiang had made several. Successful aggression is rarely self-terminated nor is the desire of a people to repel the invader so easily denied. Chiang, however, had little choice and his task inside the Wall was great enough. His first year of rule had been plagued by revolts of the leaders who had helped him to power and then resisted disbandment. At various times during 1929-30 the Kwangsi Generals Li Tsung-jen, Pai Ch'ung-hsi and Chang Fa-kwei and, in the north, Feng Yu-hsiang, had challenged the Government in armed conflict and had to be defeated or bought off. The outer provinces, Yunnan, Szechwan and Sinkiang, because they were outside the Government's control, remained sources of possible opposition. Canton continued to be intermittent host to a kind of subgovernment maintained by the leaders of the still viable left wing, Wang Ching-wei, Eugene Chen and Sun Fo, the son of Dr. Sun Yat-sen. Peiping reverted for a while to a secessionist regime under Wang, Feng and Yen Hsi-shan but, with the help of Chang Hsuch-liang, the Central Government reestablished control. These various struggles preoccupied the Kuomintang to the exclusion of social change, and as soon as they seemed settled or quiescent Chiang set himself to quell another set of domestic enemies, the Communists, who were dug into the countryside of Kiangsi. Three successive "Bandit Suppression" campaigns, as these operations were called, absorbed the Government's military effort and brought it unpleasant defeats from the Communists' guerilla tactics in the year before the Japanese struck.

Three times in eighty years, in a country in desperate need of reform, the revolutionary surge had been frustrated. Chiang was concerned with piecing together political power, not with rooting it in a new social foundation. Land rent reduction could not be pursued by a Government that had reverted to the old alliance between officials and landowners. In

Chekiang, where a program of rent reductions was genuinely attempted, its moving spirit and sponsor was assassinated and the program abandoned. Under the formula of "tutelage" the Government remained a one-party autocracy and became increasingly authoritarian and repressive, sowing the wind of rebellion. Deprived of the possibility of reform within the framework of government and hounded as outlaws, the Communist movement according to the American Vice-Consul in Hankow, Edmund Clubb, "has been forced . . . into a bitter rebellion which is sweeping the oppressed--liberal students and all--with a savage hatred of the existing regime in China." All the while the regime clung to the Three Principles of Sun Yat-sen as a kind of incantation to substitute for practice. To fill the vacuum left since the collapse of the throne, Sun was made a cult. His portrait was omnipresent and his will containing the Three Principles was recited at weekly memorial services, at all public meetings, political assemblies and patriotic holidays and by schoolchildren every Monday morning. His body was removed from Peiping to a \$6-million mausoleum built into the side of the Purple Mountain at Nanking.

Modernization if not social revolution was pushed in the form of roads and airlines, electrification, new railroads, improvement of agriculture, codification of law, new schools with modern curricula and that basic requirement for all modern organization--a logical method of arranging the language to make a filing system possible. The absence of an alphabet in China was probably as disabling as the absence of roads. Varying from province to province some programs made progress, others did not. There was so much that China needed and the age allowed so little time.

After the seizure of Mukden the Japanese Army, regardless of divided councils at home, pushed ahead to attack Chinchow, Chang Hsueh-liang's provincial capital just north of the Great Wall. They captured the city in January 1932, driving the Young Marshal out of Manchuria. The "independence" of the new state of "Manchukuo" was proclaimed in February and Henry Pu-yi, last relic of the Manchu dynasty, was installed as Regent in March. The Japanese Government, under the necessity of accommodating to the stranglehold of the Army and Navy ministers, was dragged forward by faits accomplis and by the blackmail of violent nationalism. Because it was anxious not to give the League of Nations or the signatories of the Nine-Power Treaty a reason to declare that a state of war existed between Japan and China, Tokyo attempted to legalize each forward move on the mainland as "self-defense" and "self-determination" by the people of Manchuria. Behind the facade an intense struggle was shaking Tokyo. The Government resigned in December 1931. In naming a moderate, Ki Inukai, as the new Premier, the Emperor tried to brake the headlong

course. Inukai was informed that the Emperor hoped he could curb the Army's "meddling in domestic and foreign politics"--a dangerous assignment that was to prove the Premier's death warrant. Unknown to the West, Inukai in his first month of office sent a secret envoy to Chiang Kai-shek to negotiate a settlement in Manchuria but control of Japanese policy was no longer really in civilian hands.

The effort of the Western powers to deal with the situation over the 17 months from the Mukden Incident to the adoption of the Lytton Report was crucial for the twentieth century. It brewed the acid of appeasement that gutted the League, encouraged further aggression and opened the decade of descent to war. Statesmen are not seers and their actions are taken in contemporary context with no view over the hill. The working out of a crisis takes place in stages without history's advantage of seeing the event whole and its aftermath too. It is doubtful if any stage of the Manchurian crisis could have happened otherwise, for in the course of the process there were no likely alternatives that could have been seized, no might-have-beens just barely missed. Some periods breed greatness, others feebleness. The Manchurian crisis was one of the causative events of history born, not of tragic "ifs," but of the inherent limitations of men and states.

China rested her defense on the guarantees the world had devised for just such a situation: the Nine-Power Treaty, the League Covenant and the newly added Kellogg-Briand Pact signed at Paris in 1928 by which 15 nations including Japan undertook to renounce war as an instrument of national policy, and to agree that the settlement of all disputes "shall never be sought except by pacific means"--except of course in case of "self-defense" and "vital national interest." China formally appealed to the League five days after the initial attack. Aggression had not yet tested the collective will; this was to be the first major case. Although there was eager sentiment at Geneva for doing something "wonderful" for world peace, no one was anxious to do anything specific. The year 1931 covered under economic blizzard. Britain, the major Western power in the Far East, was in the midst of political and financial crisis and about to go off the gold standard, the bourses of Europe were trembling on the edge of panic, the Weimar Republic was dying and the United States was sunk in the slough of depression. Japan's act was indeed embarrassing in view of all the machinery set up to restrain aggression but as the French Premier André Tardieu said, it was "a long way off."

It seemed immediate and compelling to the American Secretary of State, Henry L. Stimson, an outstanding advocate of disarmament and of the collective effort to outlaw war. As Governor General of the Philippines in

1927-29 and chairman of the American delegation to the London Naval Conference in 1930, Stimson had been closely engaged in the problems of the Pacific. He had seen the London Naval Treaty, outcome of his work, arouse savage resentment in Japan because it prolonged the halt in naval building and the hated 5-5-3 ratio of the Washington Treaty for five more years. The wrath of Japan's superpatriots culminated in the assassination of Premier Hamaguchi who had strongly supported the Treaty and had advised the Emperor to ratify it.

Through Stimson the attack on Manchuria reactivated the United States in world affairs, ultimately with disillusioning result that was to play its role in renewed isolation. Stimson had two objectives in the crisis: to prevent further Japanese expansion on the mainland of Asia as had been the American effort since 1917, and to uphold the system of collective security. But when the League, in the hope of sharing or possibly devolving responsibility on the United States, was prepared to invite ad hoc American adherence to the Council, he shied off, not wishing to find this baby "dumped," "deposited," or "left," as he variously complained in his diary, in or on his country's lap or doorstep. He wanted Japan to be curbed by the "vigorous judgment" of world opinion, not by the United States alone.

What Japan's move implied--whether temporary occupation or something more--and whether it represented concerted policy by the Japanese Government or another wild move by the militarists acting through the Kwantung Army, was by no means clear to the West. Through the remaining months of 1931 Stimson acted in the hope that "mobilization of public opinion against Japan" backed by threat of economic sanctions could strengthen the parliamentary parties and lead to the conclusive curbing of the military. Throughout the first four decades of the twentieth century it was always this beckoning figure of the liberal thin man inside the Japanese body politic and the hope of his reemergence that lured American policy. In 1931 who could say whether international condemnation of the Manchurian adventure, backed by threat of sanctions, would strengthen the hand of the moderates or unite Japan behind the superpatriots?

Lacking any stiffening by the British, the "vigorous judgment" of the powers that Stimson hoped for would not congeal. British foreign policy was then directed by the parent of appeasement, Sir John Simon. He was Britain's foremost lawyer, a man sircultaneously cold and unctuous, with a cautious mind, a head too small for his body and a perpetual smirk, who as Foreign Secretary did more to make his country unpopular than anything since the Boer War. Records have since been interpreted to suggest that he too wished to curb Japan, but he gave Geneva the contrary impres-

sion and caused Stimson to conclude that Britain would be content to see Japan absorbed in Manchuria rather than competing with British dominance in the Yangtze valley or reaching out toward Australasia or India.

Stimson himself did not speak for a country ready to back words with a big stick. President Hoover was very worried by the idea of economic sanctions which, unless backed by the ultimate sanction of force, he characterized with some justice as "sticking pins in tigers." Stimson argued that the risk must be weighed against the "terrible disadvantages" which Japan's action, if unrestrained, would do to the cause of peace. It must also be weighed against the danger "that Japan was setting on foot a possible war with China which might spread to the entire world." As Japan moved deeper into Manchuria he grew increasingly concerned at the threat both to world peace and to American interests in the Far East. He believed it would cause "incalculable harm" to American prestige in China if, after long association, America were now to "cynically abandon her to her fate."

Failing the joint voice of the Nine Powers or of the League or of the Kellogg-Briand Pact, he determined on some form of unilateral action but the best he could do was to dig out of the files Secretary Bryan's statement at the time of the Twenty-one Demands in 1915 which, reenunciated on January 7, 1932, came to be known as the Stimson Doctrine of Non-Recognition. It notified Japan and China that the United States "cannot admit the legality nor does it intend to recognize" any arrangement between those countries which impaired the Open Door policy or "the sovereignty, the independence, or the territorial or administrative integrity of the Republic of China" and which might be brought about by means contrary to the Kellogg-Briand Pact to which China, Japan and the United States were parties. The statement was resounding, unequivocal and, as an instrument of restraint, without practical effect. This being apparent, the League two months later accepted a resolution offered by Sir John Simon to concur in the doctrine.

In China a national anti-Japanese boycott was proving so effective that it brought on a Japanese attempt to end it by punitive action at Shanghai, center of the boycott movement. Providing themselves with the usual "incident" as pretext--this time a murdered Japanese monk--they attacked Chapei, the Chinese district of Shanghai, with planes and troops landed from warships. The air raid on Chapei of January 29, 1932, was the first terror bombing of a civilian population of an era that was to become familiar with it. The rain of bombs, the thousands killed, the ruins and wounded and refugees, under the eyes of the foreigners of Shanghai, appalled and alienated Western sentiment. Reminded of the German invasion of Belgium in 1914, Stimson determined not to be another Wilson "who did nothing

to show the shame that we felt in regard to Belgium." Chapei, plus a Japanese declaration that the clauses of the Nine-Power Treaty regarding the integrity of China were obsolete, convinced him that Japan had gone past the point of restraint by half-measures. Yet since punitive measures were beyond his power or the world's willingness, he had to choose between the inadequate or nothing, and chose the former.

Making a further attempt to obtain British collaboration, this time to invoke the Nine-Power Treaty, he found Sir John "soft and pudgy" and "very cold-footed." Again Stimson resorted to unilateral warning. He issued a public statement in February declaring the "abiding faith" of the American people in the future of China and reaffirming the principle of the Nine-Power Treaty--that China must be given the opportunity to develop into a "modern and enlightened state." He intimated to Japan that the Washington Treaties were interdependent and that nullification of the clauses relative to China could be considered as canceling the naval and nonfortification clauses. But it was an empty threat for his country was not prepared for the iron alternative of an arms race. Later, when Stimson was occupied at the Disarmament Conference, President Hoover informed Japan that the United States would not resort to economic sanctions.

The crisis was beginning to expose the soft core of the American commitment: that in underwriting the integrity of China, America had espoused a policy not sufficiently in her vital interest to fight for. The Open Door had been the triumph of a phrase. Not only had its syllables a superb and simple euphony but it also conveyed an impression of something brave and free, of wide-open opportunity that appealed to two basic American concepts, the frontier and free enterprise. As Hay said of another of his classic formulations, it had "an uncalled for success." In the long run it enmeshed the United States in that most entangling of alliances--not with a country but with a doctrine. It imposed a sense of obligation to intervene in an issue--the integrity of China--in which American security was not at stake.

With China's appeal still pending, the League faced the uncomfortable necessity of living up to the Covenant. The problem of how to restrain, or failing restraint, how far to condemn Japan without driving her out of the community of nations disturbed and bewildered the powers. The various pretexts and legalizations Japan raised always left a case to be argued. To investigate the facts the Lytton Commission was sent to Manchuria. Meanwhile fighting had spread. A Manchurian leader, General Ma Chanshan, emerged to cause the Japanese trouble. At Shanghai a brave and unexpectedly effective resistance by the Chinese 19th Route Army, virtually defying Chiang Kai-shek, drew the Japanese into a fight they had not

counted upon. Having all they could handle in Manchuria, they were glad of an excuse to withdraw from Chapei on the basis of peace terms arranged by the local foreign powers.

The Mukden Incident had by now gathered self-propelling consequences. Between February and May Japanese ultranationalists successively murdered the Finance Minister, the head of the Mitsui industrial empire and Premier Inukai whose assassins were army officers in uniform. Giving way to a series of national governments, his death marked the end of the political party system. In Japanese opinion Stimson was the evil agent of events, responsible for the world's misunderstanding of Japan and for ill feeling in the United States. Japanese publicists began speaking of an "Asiatic Monroe Doctrine" and suggesting that any attempt by the United States to interfere with Japan's "destiny" in Asia would be cause for war. Anticipating an unfavorable report by the Lytton Commission, Japan challenged it in advance by according de jure recognition to Manchukuo in September.

The Lytton Report was submitted in October. Though phrased as decently as possible in the pale hope of saving enough face for Japan to make it possible for her to accept it, the report unavoidably found that Japan had acted in violation of the treaties and that the two pillars of her case, "self-defense" and "self-determination," were unsupported by the facts. It recognized that a return to the status quo ante was not feasible and it recommended an autonomous administration under restored Chinese sovereignty with special provision for Japan's economic interests. Through long debate on adoption of the report, the League endeavored somehow to escape the pincers of the dilemma closing in on it: whether to condemn aggression, which was likely to force Japan into a break with the West and a back-to-Asia policy; or to paste over the episode by some legitimatizing formula that would keep the League's structure, if not its purpose, intact.

With the Lytton Report lying on the table no escape was possible. It was adopted in February 1933 and on the following day, after a speech of passionate self-righteousness and warning by the Japanese delegate, Japan withdrew from the League. To underscore her defiance and the futility of international words without teeth, Japanese troops took over Jehol, another province north of the Wall, and then crossed over into Hopei, where they established a demilitarized zone 30 to 40 miles wide between Peiping and Tientsin into which Chinese troops could not enter without Japanese consent. Here this phase of Japan's destiny came to a halt for the time being, legalized by the Tangku Truce negotiated with, or imposed upon, the Chinese Government. It was accepted by Chiang Kai-shek, who, in the same month that the Japanese invaded Hopei, launched 250,000 of his best troops in a fourth Bandit Suppression campaign against the Communists in the south. He had made the same choice as his predecessor, Prince Kung,

Regent at the time of the Taiping Rebellion, who said the rebels were a disease of China's vitals, the barbarians an affliction only of the limbs.

The Manchurian crisis left China's integrity henceforward dependent on the size of the bites Japan could digest. It brought about the supremacy of the military in Japan, but this was an internal process which would have taken the same course even if Japan's fellow-nations had not condemned her action. It left the elaborate structure of the Washington Treaties a hollow shell and exposed the weakness of the collective will. The League, the Nine-Power Treaty and the Kellogg-Briand Pact, separately or together, had not been enough. Between desire for collective security and its implementation the gulf was now painfully apparent. Men began to doubt whether any action short of force could deter a nation from aggression it had determined on. After the Manchurian crisis the nations found themselves, as Stimson confessed, "baffled and pessimistic."

In May 1933, the same month as the Tangku Truce, Stilwell's tour at Benning came to an end accompanied by just such an episode of infuriating bureaucracy as General Wells meant when he wrote of those actions that develop the "pain in your soul." Joe Jr.'s graduation from West Point was to take place within two weeks but owing to the need of officers to staff President Roosevelt's emergency creation of the Civilian Conservation Corps, routine leave between posts was canceled. Every officer was required to report directly to his next station and could not go off duty for any reason. All Stilwell's requests for delay, including, as a last resort, one to General Douglas MacArthur, then Chief of Staff, were turned down. Prevented from attending his eldest son's graduation from his own alma mater, the father was left with what ire can be imagined. He naturally laid the blame on that man in the White House. Mrs. Stilwell and her second daughter, "Doot," represented the family at West Point while Stilwell set off for his new post in California in the car with the two youngest children and Nance and the dog. He arrived after a week of driving to find his predecessor still in place, no orders awaiting him and nothing for him to do. A telegram from Win on the day of Joe's graduation, sharpening the fact of his absence, made him write, "Well, this puts a final touch on my disgust with the machine."

After a period just short of four years at Benning, from which Marshall had departed in 1932, Stilwell had grown restless, to the point of describing his own departure as "Escape from Bondage." He had not wanted to put in for the upper-level staff course at the Army War College, even though it was the acme in status, and when his colleague and fellow-Infantry officer Omar Bradley applied for it, Joe said to him, "Brad, why do you want to go to the War College to learn to do what you don't want to do

anyway?" He had been unsuccessful in obtaining foreign service for his next detail, but the War Department had satisfied his second preference for "any duty on the West Coast" by assigning him to San Diego to train the Organized Reserves of the IXth Corps Area. Although the duty was disappointing, it had the advantage of bringing the Stilwells closer to their property at Carmel where they intended to build a home.

During the two years while he was at San Diego Stilwell did his best in another teaching job to transfer the principle of realistic field exercises to the Reserves. In a time of isolationism, enthusiasm for military training was not high. Men from office and salesroom on two-week duty did not offer Stilwell the most professional material but he knew they were the country's resource in war and as one of them said, "He took us seriously. He was probably the best man we ever had." By bringing together the various components of the Army in the area to train together and by giving common-sense instruction in the real tasks of command, he aroused the men's interest. "We have never received better instruction than we are now receiving," one group stated in a resolution of appreciation.

Privately Stilwell was bored and discouraged. He felt that if the War Department thought no more of him than to put him in this kind of job, he could not, at fifty-one and not yet a full colonel, look forward to a military career of much promise. "There will never be a single work of history with me in it," he wrote in a personal summing up. Many times "disgust with the machine" had brought him to the verge of retirement and he now began to discuss the possibility seriously with his family. The house-at Carmel, built in 1934 at a cost of \$27,000 with money from the stocks left to him by his father and to Win by her mother, was ready and Stilwell hoped to live on savings, retirement pay and what work he could find to employ his talents as a teacher. In the gloom of the depression, however, the outlook was dim and held him back from taking the plunge into retirement precipitously. Colonel Marshall was similarly fretting at this time in a post with the Illinois National Guard. Angry at the stagnation in the promotion system, Marshall wrote to a friend in 1934 that he was "tired of seeing mediocrity placed in high position with brilliance and talent damned by lack of rank to obscurity."

At a low point for Stilwell, the opening came. Previously he had never thought of himself as eligible for the post of military attaché because it had always required a private income. But in 1934, in order to extend its choice of qualified officers, the War Department added an expense allowance to the post. At once friends in the Department queried whether he wanted the appointment to Peiping (where the Legations remained) and, given his qualifications, easily obtained it for him. Although a military attaché's duties are assigned by MID, he serves as a member of the diplo-

matic mission. Receiving his appointment from Secretary of State Cordell Hull in January 1935, Stilwell found himself, of all things, a diplomat, but that misfortune was bearable for the sake of return to China. "How intensely interesting the international situation is in the Orient at this time," a fellow-officer wrote in a letter of congratulations. "No one can tell how soon we may be mixed up in that situation."

The signs were certainly provocative. In 1934, in a historic statement announcing her intention to control China, Japan slammed shut the open door. Voiced by a spokesman of the Japanese Foreign Office, Eiji Amau, the statement proclaimed it to be Japan's purpose to act as "guardian of peace and order in East Asia." As such, Japan claimed the right to oppose loans or any other form of support by other nations to China and denied China's right to "avail herself of the influence of any other country to resist Japan." The Amau Doctrine startled the world; nevertheless American reaction was held to a low key. With the energies of the Roosevelt Administration strained in the tremendous effort of domestic reform, the Government was not looking for a foreign quarrel. Secretary Hull's policy was to abate the ill feeling left by Stimson. His reply, while necessarily putting America on record as rejecting the Amau Doctrine, was issued, as he said, in a "respectful and friendly spirit."

In practice the Japanese continued their penetration of Inner Mongolia and north China through political arrangements with puppet governors and economic flooding by organized smuggling of opium and Japanese goods. While the north eroded, Chiang continued passive to the Japanese while reorganizing and retraining his army with the help of German advisers for use against the Communists. In 1934 with a mobilization of 700,000 he launched the fifth Bandit Suppression campaign against Communist forces which numbered about 160,000. This time, with artillery, planes and German coaching, he was at last able to overcome the enemy's guerilla tactics. A cordon of blockhouses gradually tightened was designed to force the Communists into positional warfare or else annihilation by siege and starvation. The policy practiced by the Nationalist forces was to exterminate the local peasantry who had amalgamated with the Communists and turn the region into a wasteland incapable of supporting the guerilla troops. Houses were burned, cattle and people driven away, fields left untilled, while piles of bodies rotted in the villages. Through execution or starvation the Nationalists wiped out countless fellow-Chinese. In October 1934 the Communist remnant of some 90,000 to 100,000 broke out to the west and, scattering to escape Chiang's planes, set forth on the Long March through China's outback. After 5,000 miles and a year's duration, the trek brought them to a new revolutionary base in northern Shensi. They had been uprooted but not exterminated and the problem remained.

In December 1934 Japan gave notice of intention to terminate her adherence to the Washington Naval Treaty when it should come up for renewal two years hence. Under the constant pressure of the militarists' demand for naval parity and an end to the yoke of 5-5-3, the last treaty tie with the West was now severed.

On board ship for China in June 1935 Stilwell drew up his estimate of the situation under the title "Future Developments in China." Revealing how closely he had been studying events, it was an analysis of sound strategic and political judgment. He recognized that Japan's goal was to be "the major power in the Far East" with control of eastern Siberia, Manchuria, Korea, China, Formosa, the Philippines and Netherlands East Indies. Because of the development of air power, Japan would endeavor to make her home islands invulnerable against Russia by "pushing her front out to the Gobi desert and make Russia operate from the other side." This required gradual encroachment on and control of Inner Mongolia and north China, which was already evident in the "demilitarizing," that is the substituting of Japanese for Chinese force, of the Peiping-Tientsin area. The program would be extended in the northern provinces until Japan arrived at complete control north of the Yangtze with all the commerce of north China in her hands, leaving Shanghai to the "so-called Nationalists."

"Is there any possibility that this encroachment will be stopped? No, not by the Chinese," Stilwell wrote. Now was the vital time to resist, otherwise it would be too late, but Chiang Kai-shek showed no signs of being willing to risk an open break with Japan. "He knows that he would be defeated which would mean that revolt would break out behind him. Therefore he will sit tight, hold on to what he can and count on foreign influence to help him retain Shanghai where so much foreign business centers."

All of Japan's acts in China, Stilwell believed, were premised on the necessity of creating a "solid western frontier" against Russia. North China, he assumed, would be lost to the Chinese. The foreign powers would do nothing more than "fuss and fume," the United States "would do nothing more than write notes," and "a fait accompli will again be accepted." Japan would not be seriously opposed by China or by the world at large.

Stilwell's final comment showed him possessed of that unusual talent--the capacity to understand a historical process while it was happening. "Paradoxically," he wrote, "each successful encroachment will be accepted more and more as inevitable and the foreign powers will be less and less inclined to call a halt." This was a classic definition of the appeasement era before history gave it a name.

## 7

## Military Attaché:

## China's Last Chance, 1935-37

WHEN Stilwell, promoted to full colonel, came back to Peiping on July 7, 1935, the future of China, the expansion of Japan, the implications for the United States, were spread before him to study as military observer. The capabilities and intentions of the host country are the military attaché's subject. He serves as an intelligence officer whose function it is to keep his War Department informed of factors and developments of military significance. His sources are official and unofficial: inspection of troops, attendance at field exercises, contact with the right people and cultivation of foreign colleagues, study of the press, reports of private agents, and general circulation with open eyes and ears. Ordinarily, the aspect of his task most seriously pursued by the military attaché is the social, on the theory that parties are work. But society was not Stilwell's forte; he avoided the Peking Club and was not felt to be "one of us" by its frequenters. But he was agreeable to a Chinese aristocrat like Mme. Dan, a Manchu princess, former lady-in-waiting to the Empress Dowager, and one of the most distinguished and educated women of the old nobility, who was often entertained by the Stilwells. He cultivated other Chinese acquaintances as diverse as Chiang Monlin, Chancellor of Peking University, and Jade Joe, a dealer in art objects. As Attaché he lived in a 100-year-old house built for a Viceroy of Canton with many courts and lacquered pillars. He commissioned a Chinese painting for one wall of the drawing room, enlarged his collection of ivory fan handles, purchased

Mongolian saddle blankets, a magnificent robe of the Empress Dowager and other treasures.

The charm of life in China that for many Westerners counterbalanced the filth, the cruelty, the indifference to misery and disregard for human life was the quality of her people. It was also true that foreigners, including missionaries, enjoyed China because they lived better, with more status, servants and comfort than at home. But for people like Stilwell the added attraction was to be in contact with a highly civilized society. The Chinese had innate dignity and self-respect, humor, stamina, quickness of mind and lovely women with exquisite figures. Stilwell's Assistant Military Attaché, Captain David D. Barrett, the most accomplished linguist among the American military, considered the Chinese "the smartest, in many ways the most civilized, in general the most charming (especially when they want to be) and certainly on the average the best looking people in the world."

If they seemed deficient in what Westerners call loyalty, indulged in official corruption as a matter of course, did not stress honesty among their virtues, were sometimes arrogant and sometimes supersensitive, they made up for it as heirs of an old and sophisticated culture that compelled admiration. Sun Tzu, a fifth century B.C. writer on military theory and practice who anticipated much of Clausewitz and more of Napoleon, could be read by Stilwell and his professional colleagues with profit.

Under Japanese pressure the integrity of north China was crumbling like the sand cliffs of a battered coastline. Since halting their military advance in the Tangku Truce two years before, the Japanese Army had been conducting a campaign of steady intimidation with the object of detaching north China as an "autonomous" state like Manchukuo. On the day before Stilwell arrived, another portion of Chinese sovereignty fell away, in an episode recorded by history as the Ho-Umezu Agreement. On the grounds that China had violated the Tangku Truce by "lack of sincerity" in suppressing anti-Japanese activities, the Kwantang Army presented a set of demands requiring all anti-Japanese officials to be removed, puppet officials substituted and the remaining Nationalist troops in Hopei withdrawn. General Ho Ying-chin, the Generalissimo's deputy in Peiping, signed the conditions. Bitterness accumulated against Chiang Kai-shek. The fiercely independent ruler of Shantung, General Han Fu-chu, who hated Japan and Chiang Kai-shek equally, refused to allow Nationalist troops withdrawing from Hopei to cross his borders. In Hopei the unhappy local Governor, General Sung Che-yuan, loyal to his country but required to collaborate with its invaders, was left to maintain the fiction of Chinese sovereignty under daily humiliations at the hands of the Japanese.

For the past two years Japan had been exerting every form of political and economic pressure to force Nanking into a "rapprochement," meaning in effect submission to Japanese penetration and control. China's withdrawal from the League was demanded, her efforts to obtain loans or other help from the West frustrated. She was to be cut off from outside assistance. Convinced of China's military and industrial inferiority vis-à-vis Japan, Chiang Kai-shek believed he had no choice but to follow a policy of compliance and conciliation while hoping for time to bring a change of fortune. But time was running the other way. With Fascism on the rise in Europe and isolationism in the United States, neither Britain nor America was in a mood to court trouble with Japan by overt help to China. In March 1935 Hitler, having previously withdrawn Germany from the League, repudiated the Versailles Treaty and declared Germany's intention to rearm. In May Italy attacked Ethiopia. In America, following public shock at the Nye Committee's disclosures on the relation of the sale of arms to involvement in war, Congress was drafting neutrality legislation against aid to belligerents.

With the Japanese military pervading north China, strutting the streets, knocking Chinese out of their way with blows of their rifle butts, dictating to puppet governors and officials, summoning press conferences and issuing fire-eating statements about Japan's "divine mission" to lead the peoples of Asia, the daily reality of China's subjugation was more apparent in Peiping than in Nanking. Although branch offices of the foreign missions had been opened in Nanking under consuls and chargés, the diplomatic corps was not eager to uproot itself and move down to the muddy city on the Yangtze where it rained all year, new premises would be hard to find and the permanence of the Government was dubious. Owning property in the Legation Quarter of Peiping, comfortable in their clubs and summer homes in the Western Hills, the foreign missions preferred to stay in the Imperial City where life was still pleasant even as its end visibly approached.

Nanking had not been used as a capital for hundreds of years and was inhabited by "those nasty Yangtze Valley people," as Stilwell called them, who compared unfavorably with the agreeable northerners. Among residents of Peiping it was an article of faith that the farther south, the worse the inhabitants. The Kuomintang, however, pressed hard for transfer of the Legations as evidence of foreign recognition of its stability, and this much courtesy after eight years could not be indefinitely withheld. With reluctant feet the official transfer was to be accomplished in 1936. American Legation quarters in Peiping became a Consulate-General with some of the diplomatic staff remaining, including, happily for Stilwell, the Mili
