free markets also can inflict hardship on specific groups in what some regard as the overly aggressive drive to provide financial rewards for corporate executives and the relatively few owners of capital. The number one grievance against FDI/MNCs by unions in industrialized countries has been the allegedly growing tendency of employers to reduce labor costs by shutting down production in the home country and moving it to LDCs--or threatening to do so. Job shifts to foreign subsidiaries in lower wage countries have been most lambasted in the United States, but they also have occurred in Japan (mostly to other Asian countries) and Germany (mostly to Central Europe). No data exist to definitively test the standard corporate riposte that their ability to remain in business would have been put at risk if they continued relying on relatively high-priced labor in a globalized world of efficiency-seeking competitors. Nor are there conclusive data to validate labor's claims that significant increases in aggregate unemployment can be linked directly to outward FDI.

MNCs seeking to cut production costs are attracted by differences in factor endowments, most notably an ample labor supply. In such cases, incoming FDI will tend not to raise the overall skill or income levels of the labor force. The benefits will come in providing additional jobs, at or above prevailing wage levels, to countries likely to have relatively high rates of unemployment and underemployment. Cheaper labor, however, is not always the main objective. If a subsidiary is turning out state-of-the-art high-tech goods, relatively high-wage jobs will be created in host countries.

Whether the objective is highly skilled labor, very cheap labor, or strategic geographic location, this form of FDI has an above-average likelihood of generating increased foreign exchange earnings for host countries. An efficiency-seeking subsidiary is not ordinarily established to serve a single national market. Many are specifically designed to be export platforms. The statistic that U.S.-owned subsidiaries in Ireland export more than 95 percent of their output in that country epitomizes the export-platform/efficiency-seeking model of overseas investment. $^{4}$ One study of the overall impact of FDI on LDCs found that in addition to increased foreign exchange, efficiency-seeking FDI "is more likely to bring in technology and know-how which is compatible to the host countries' level of development, and enables local suppliers and competitors to benefit from spillovers through adaptation and imitation.... As a result, one would expect a relatively strong growth impact of ... efficiency-seeking FDI." $^{5}$

Strategic Asset-Seeking FDI A relatively specialized and infrequent motivation for engaging in FDI is to acquire some or all of the assets of a foreign company to enhance the purchasing corporation's competitiveness, either through increased synergy or less competition. The business objective in this case is not to reduce costs or protect specific markets. Instead, it is to acquire assets that are

perceived to be capable of strengthening the overall competitive position of the acquiring company or weakening that of competitors. $^{6}$ Acquisition of strategic assets may allow a company to swallow a competitor, broaden its product line, upgrade the technology embedded in its products, or prevent a third company from acquiring the purchased assets. This form of direct investment has no inherent advantages or disadvantages (except possibly to reduce competition) of significance for either the host or home countries as a whole. If this kind of transaction successfully achieves its commercial goals, the main beneficiaries most likely will be the shareholders of the acquiring company.

## By the Role in the Parent Company's Global Production Strategy

A second kind of FDI can be defined in terms of which of two broad production strategies a foreign subsidiary is designed to contribute. In the manufacturing sector, the most common form of FDI is characterized as horizontal. This term refers to a horizontal transfer of a portion of home country production to overseas subsidiaries for the purpose of strengthening the firm's global competitive position. The potential benefits to the host country's economy would be similar in most cases to those previously attributed to market-seeking FDI.

An initial reduction in exports of the finished products whose manufacture has been shifted out of the home country is the norm. But in the medium to long term, the home country's total exports would not automatically decline by the amount of production that had moved overseas. Given the sharp increases in intracorporate trade experienced by the two biggest MNC home countries, the United States and Japan, the chances are good that the initial export loss will be partly or totally offset by increases in exports of other products from the home country. As already noted, overseas subsidiaries can trigger increased shipments of components of the product now being made overseas, capital equipment and replacement parts to be used on the new subsidiary's assembly line, and complementary models manufactured only in the headquarters country that will be marketed by the overseas subsidiary. In a similar vein, some domestic jobs will be eliminated when production lines are shifted overseas, yet the aggregate number of unemployed workers need not necessarily rise. The affected workers might simply be assigned to making other goods produced by the same company. Alternatively, they might find comparable or even better jobs elsewhere, a relatively common occurrence in a growing economy. The closing of a given production line (for any reason) may or may not result in a net loss of jobs on a nationwide basis; total employment depends mainly on the business cycle.

Vertical FDI has been the faster growing subcategory of production strategy since the 1980s. This is due to the increasing technical complexity of a wide range

of manufactured goods, most notably automobiles and information technology hardware. Advances in communications, data transmission, and transportation have allowed the business strategy known as global production networks and vertical integration to thrive and operate at high rates of efficiency. Technological progress is responsible for the growth of vertical FDI beyond its original phase in which oil and other resource companies extracted raw materials and exported them to company-owned facilities for processing.

The most common version of vertical FDI is dividing the manufacturing process into segments in which various parts of a finished product are made by two or more subsidiaries in two or more countries anywhere in the world. For example, as components become more numerous and more complicated to design and manufacture, automakers increasingly designate individual subsidiaries to specialize in making engines, transmissions, and so on. Geographic specialization exploits cost advantages in different countries for different products. In economic jargon, companies are minimizing production costs by taking advantage of international factor-price differentials, a core concept of the law of comparative advantage. Capital-intensive goods and high-skilled services mainly will be produced in capital and skilled labor-rich developed countries. Labor-intensive, low-tech products and simple assembly work will be assigned to subsidiaries in poorer countries with relatively low labor costs. The spread of global production networks is praised in some quarters as elevating the efficient use of the world's resources to a new level.

Vertical FDI is inherently trade-creating. Intracorporate trade blossoms as intermediate goods are exported from various countries either to the home country or to a third country for final assembly. As parts, components, and raw materials move back and forth in a highly complex global production network, the "traditional connection between production and market is broken." $^{7}$

Export processing zones (EPZs; also referred to as free trade zones) are a common player in vertical integration. EPZs have been established almost exclusively by LDCs. MNCs operating subsidiaries in EPZs usually do so for the purpose of exporting labor-intensive goods to other subsidiaries of the parent company. Incentives to build a subsidiary in an export zone, which is usually physically separated from the rest of the country, include exemptions from import barriers, most business regulations, and some or all corporate income taxes.

## Method of Establishing a Foreign Subsidiary

Another kind of FDI can be identified on the basis of how a foreign subsidiary or affiliate has been established. Once again, disaggregation is appropriate to designate the options available to MNCs. And once again, each of three distinguishable options has its own characteristics and brings its own cost-benefit ratio

to the table. The vast majority of new FDI has originated either as greenfield investments or through M&As. The former involves incorporating and building a brand new local company, hypothetically involving construction of new facility on an open, grassy field. The latter involves acquisition by a foreign-based company of management control over an existing company in the host country; it does this through the purchase of voting stock in the local corporation. Alternatively, the transaction could involve a mutual transfer of stock to consummate a formal merger of equals located in two countries. M&As emerged only in the 1990s as a consistently significant percentage of new FDI, presumably because a growing number of companies were nearing the limits of further growth from within. The larger M&A deals thus far have mostly been between big European and American companies. (There is no way to know whether the relatively recent upsurge in M&As relative to greenfield investment is a temporary or long-term change in corporate strategy.)

The third means of establishing a foreign subsidiary is via privatization. The purchase of a government-owned industry, utility, transportation system, and so on is a by-product of the shift in the 1990s toward free market policies by developing countries in Asia, Latin America, and Africa, as well as in formerly communist countries in transition from command to private enterprise-based economic systems. In economic terms, privatization differs from M&As in that the seller is the government of what becomes the host country and the buyer acquires an entity for whom profits were not a priority goal (or necessity). Unless renationalized, an entity can only be privatized once. Any further transfers of ownership would be between two private companies and fall into the commercial M&A category.

The most important difference in economic impact between incoming FDI taking the form of greenfield plants and incoming FDI via M&As or privatization can be summed up in one word: incrementalism. A takeover of an existing business entity does not initially create the incremental economic activity, jobs, and tax revenue in host countries associated with greenfield investments. Mergers, takeovers, and privatization at the outset involve only a change in ownership. Though the foreign company may later decide to expand output in its newly acquired foreign subsidiary, it might first go on a cost-cutting offensive that reduces the local payroll by a considerable margin. This is the likely scenario when a foreign company acquires a poorly managed, money-losing company. The new property in such a case tends to be viewed as a candidate for a corporate "makeover" incorporating better management and more efficient production processes.

Although free-market economists praise any and all improvements in efficiency, political leaders prefer the benefits of incrementalism provided by greenfield investments--especially those that do not compete with local companies. Very few voters express happiness if a foreign firm is able to maintain the

output of what previously had been a locally owned company while using only a fraction of the old workforce. Nationalists in all countries will be alarmed at the perceived loss of control associated with any extensive takeovers of local businesses by foreign interests. This was exactly the feeling voiced by some Americans in the 1980s as Japanese companies went on what was widely viewed as a buying spree in the United States (see chapter 7).

## By Method of Financing a New Subsidiary

Absent an exchange of common stock, new FDI cannot occur without a capital outlay by a foreign-based company in a host country. The foreign MNC most likely will transfer hard currency, usually dollars, from its home country. For greenfield investments, these funds will be converted into the local currency to pay for the initial purchase of land, construction of buildings, equipment, and the hiring and training of workers. For most M&As, the capital outlay consists of purchasing equity from the existing owners of the targeted local company. Inflows of dollars or euros converted into local currencies have a favorable balance of payments impact of special importance to LDCs: They provide additional resources to pay for imports of goods and services needed to spur economic development and raise living standards. For many countries, FDI-related capital inflows have become a relatively stable and important source of financing trade deficits and therefore a valuable force for economic growth.

FDI can take place without international capital flows. New subsidiaries can be built and acquisitions of existing companies can be made by borrowing in the local capital markets. A foreign MNC may calculate that it can save money by using its superior credit rating to raise needed capital by borrowing from banks or selling bonds in the host country. Locally financed FDI has two drawbacks for the host country's economy. First, by definition, the host suffers the opportunity cost of forgone incoming foreign exchange from the foreign MNC's headquarters country. Second, there may be a crowding-out effect as domestic banks prefer to engage in relatively risk-free lending to blue-chip foreign companies rather than making loans to local businesses with lower quality credit ratings. The potential for crowding out is greatest in countries where the volume of borrowing by foreign investors is highest relative to the domestic availability of lendable funds.

## By Extent of Foreign Ownership

When a foreign company owns at least 10 percent equity in a foreign-based company, it is considered to be FDI. However, it is not axiomatic that a relatively small percentage of ownership translates into an active voice in management decisions. The foreign company in such cases may be more interested in the

financial rewards associated with investment in a growth company than having an active voice in the day-to-day operation of the company. A "hands-off" FDI would normally have no direct impact on the economies of either the host or home country. At the other extreme is the highly visible, attention-grabbing kind of FDI that takes place when large corporations establish major overseas subsidiaries that in almost all cases are 100 percent owned. Big, globe-spanning companies like ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch Shell, IBM, General Motors, Ford, Toyota, General Electric, Nestlé, and Siemens can have a significant impact on the economies of countries that host their investments. Their above-average size and ability to attract attention means that they are important but not necessarily the benchmark for assessing the behavior and impact of MNCs in general.

A discussion of how the variable of foreign ownership creates differences in FDI characteristics and effects would not be complete without an examination of international partnerships. They seek to facilitate the achievement of business objectives that would be financially burdensome, excessively time-consuming, or possibly unattainable if the two (and occasionally more) partnering companies acted independently. Partnership is attractive when a company has rejected acquiring or merging with another firm, perhaps due to the latter's being involved in business lines that are alien or unattractive to the potential suitor. $^{8}$

International joint ventures and strategic alliances are the two most common and important forms of partnership between companies headquartered in different countries. $^{9}$ Imbued with at least two separate corporate cultures, jointly owned business entities tend to require more compromise and consultations than a subsidiary of a company with a single set of priorities, executives, and shareholders. Joint ventures and strategic alliances have not demonstrated extraordinary or distinctive effects on national economies. They tend to be microeconomic phenomena best analyzed mainly at the company level.

The most important qualitative difference between these two arrangements is that a joint venture requires creation of a newly incorporated, jointly owned business entity in an agreed-on country (or countries). A strategic alliance consists only of formally specified areas of collaboration between cooperating companies who remain legally independent of one another. Otherwise, both have similar objectives and potential consequences. International partnerships between two already powerful, well-managed companies can represent a healthy step forward in achieving greater efficiency and better products. Alternatively, a mutual strengthening of two ostensible rivals and an increase in their market shares can reduce competition, deliberately or unintentionally, by squeezing existing competitors and discouraging new entrants.

Collaboration between companies in different countries is nothing novel. "What is new is their current scale, their proliferation and the fact that they have become central to the global strategies of many firms rather than peripheral to them. Most

strikingly, the great majority of strategic alliances have been between competitors. $^{10}$ According to an OECD study, companies that "have long shunned joint ventures or close collaboration with other firms in their core business areas are increasingly entering into such co-operative arrangements." $^{11}$ By one measure, international strategic alliances, including joint ventures, increased more than fivefold to 4,440 between 1989 and 1999. The study also found evidence that recent international partnerships had become "far larger in scale and value terms than earlier partnerships." It concluded that the two-to-one ratio between international and domestic strategic alliances illustrates that globalization "is a primary motivation for alliances." $^{12}$

Arguably, the search for synergy is the most common rationale for strategic alliances and joint ventures. Synergy in this case can be defined as "additional economic benefits (financial, operational, or technological) arising from cooperation between two parties that provide each other with complementary resources or capabilities." $^{13}$ In particular, an international partnership can promote economies of scale for the partners in the various stages of manufacturing: raw materials acquisition, production, marketing, and distribution. Another common inspiration for formal international cooperation among even the largest corporations is the need to pool capital to spread financial risks. The multibillion-dollar pursuit of a breakthrough technology (new generations of semiconductor chips are an excellent example) may be too expensive to be borne by just one company. Business alliances can reduce the absolute size of each participant's R&D outlays, and they can reduce potential losses in expensive and risky efforts at innovation that are long shots to produce a commercially viable product.

Strategic partnerships and joint ventures are used sometimes to enlarge the pool of scientific and engineering talent needed to successfully develop an especially challenging new technology. This is yet another reason to mutually learn from and draw on some aspect of the superior intellectual capital or marketing know-how of the other company. New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI) is a joint venture established in California in 1984 whose origin is generally attributed to different needs of two automobile giants. General Motors reportedly wanted to observe firsthand the lean production techniques of Toyota. The Japanese company reportedly wanted to observe firsthand GM's expertise in dealing with the regulatory and marketing nuances of manufacturing and mass retailing automobiles in the United States. The NUMMI partnership supports the contention that any given FDI project can be mutually advantageous and that an injured party is not inevitable.

Joint ventures are typically the partnership vehicle of choice if a foreign company is uncertain about the vagaries of an especially "exotic" foreign market it wishes to enter and sees virtues in piggybacking on the domestic expertise and the commercial and political connections of a savvy local company. A foreign company may opt for a joint venture with a local company to project an image of a

domestic business and reduce perceptions that it is an outsider. Government restrictions may make joint ventures compulsory. Until the Japanese government was pressured into genuine liberalization beginning in the 1970s, nearly all incoming FDI took place through joint ventures with foreign ownership capped at 50 percent. (Even if it was a 50/50 partnership, in most cases there was no doubt that the Japanese partner had the upper hand and would manage the company in conformity with that country's unique business culture and equally unique government-business relationship.)

## Identifying and Classifying Different Kinds of MNCs

To the casual observer, the term MNC invariably conjures up the image of the usual suspects: big oil companies, big manufacturers of consumer goods, big banks, and so on. The 100 largest MNCs, as measured by UNCTAD, do indeed account for a statistically significant percentage (roughly 15 percent) of the annual sales and employment of the approximately 700,000 foreign-owned or -controlled subsidiaries doing business around the world. $^{14}$ None of these indicators, however, suggest that it is valid to define the behavior and effects of all MNCs in terms of the largest, most visible, and often most notorious companies. Because size itself is an important variable in determining behavior and effects, an objective analysis cannot logically declare the behavior of a numerically small sample of corporate behemoths to be representative of the much larger statistical universe.

As with FDI, MNCs can be divided into a number of distinctive kinds, most of which have their own unique subsets of identifiable qualities. Also like FDI, differences in business objectives, relationships to the host country's economy, financial structure, propensity to export, and so on will produce two continuums, one for host and one for home countries, on which MNC activities can be charted from very favorable to very unfavorable. Even within the same industrial sector and among companies of comparable size from the same home country, the heterogeneity factor prevails. Given the large number of variables, an individual foreign subsidiary should not be stereotyped through a one-size-fits-all ledger of positive and negative trade-offs. With the chance of identical results so slim, it is not a big exaggeration to advocate disaggregation down to a subsidiary by subsidiary review as the ideal means of avoiding the fallacy of generalization when evaluating the overall FDI and MNC phenomena.

## By Economic Sector

Economists divide national economies into three broad sectors based on their distinctly different outputs and characteristics. The primary sector extracts raw

materials and harvests commodities. The secondary sector equates to manufacturing. The tertiary sector encompasses services. MNCs within each of these sectors share a number of common traits and effects that tend not to be found in companies operating in the other sectors.

Primary Sector As noted, natural resource-extracting companies led the first wave of modern FDI. Being first has done nothing to enhance their image. As also noted, for a number of reasons, fear and loathing have long been directed at them to a degree that is disproportionately high to their numbers relative to MNCs in the manufacturing and services sectors.

The questions of ownership and control over natural resources production schedules assume maximum significance in the frequent instances where the producing country is relatively poor. Most overseas subsidiaries of mining and oil companies were and are located in former colonies, most of whom have lingering fears about neocolonialism in general and concerns about the power of foreign-owned companies in particular. The dependency of countries in the South on MNGs to deliver hard currency payments in exchange for overseas sales of their natural resources is especially sensitive when dealing with nonreplenishable resources. By definition, such a mineral or metal eventually will be exhausted, as will the income flow derived from selling it. For this reason, noncorrupt governments of resource-rich countries cannot be pleased when foreign companies dominate decisions on production levels and price. $^{15}$

Oil is the most important example of powerful control over LDC-based natural resources by carpetbagger MNCs. For decades, the large international oil companies collectively set terms for royalties received by host countries, determined volumes of drilling, and effectively controlled worldwide prices of that commodity. However many billions of dollars in potential royalties have been forgone by LDC governments, a dramatic about-face begun in the early 1970s revolutionized the relationship between countries belonging to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the oil companies. The eruption of accumulated anger in the oil-producing countries of the Middle East, North Africa, and in Venezuela triggered a classic case study in the ultimate power of sovereign governments, even in small countries, over the largest, most economically powerful MNCs. In the 1970s, one OPEC country after another nationalized local operations of foreign oil companies and began dictating to them financial terms and levels of output. In his seminal study of the history of oil in world affairs, Daniel Yergin eloquently explained the legitimate but conflicting claims that formed the two sides to the story of host country-oil company relations:

The host country [has] sovereignty over the oil beneath its soil. Yet the oil was without value until the foreign company risked its capital and

employed its expertise to discover, produce, and market it. The host country was, in essence, the landlord, the company a mere tenant, who ... [paid] an agreed-upon rent. But, if through the tenant's risk-taking and efforts, a discovery was made and the value of the landlord's property vastly increased, should the tenant continue to pay the same rent as under the original terms...?

[Producing countries saw the companies as] "exploiting" the country, stifling development, denying social prosperity, … and certainly acting as "masters"--in a haughty, arrogant, and "superior" manner….[Oil companies felt] they had taken the risks…and they signed laboriously negotiated contracts, which gave them certain rights. They had created value where there was none. They needed to be compensated for the risks they had taken--and the dry holes they had drilled. $^{16}$

A second lightning rod for criticism of primary sector MNCs is the relatively limited degree to which the typical extractive project is commercially integrated with the local economy, especially in developing countries. Most mines, oil wells, plantations, and so on are largely self-contained enclaves (sometimes fenced-in communities) located away from main population centers. The result is minimal linkage with host country economies in comparison with manufacturing direct investment, which often procures goods and services from indigenous companies. The local workers hired by natural resource companies tend to be relatively few in number and concentrated in the lower skilled or most dangerous jobs.

Another aspect of the separation between resource-seeking FDI and the host country's economy is that it has seldom provided transfers of technology that could be incorporated into the local industrial sector. Furthermore, it historically has established little value-added activity within LDCs. Processing raw materials such as petroleum or cut diamonds into finished products requires capital and skilled labor, both of which are in short supply in LDCs. The payoff from adding value is that industrialization and rising levels of productivity work hand in hand as the chief catalysts of increased wealth and higher living standards. Hence, a handful of wealthy countries prefers to retain dominance in the value-added process. Their success in doing so is suggested by the fact that facilities for processing raw materials into manufactured goods are located predominantly in the North.

The invaluable benefit provided by FDI in the primary sector has been provision of much-needed foreign exchange to governments that lack the indigenous technical and marketing expertise to act entirely on their own to cash in on the commercial value of their natural resources. For most LDCs, the money earned from the in-country activity of primary sector MNCs is a major source of revenue for the national government. These hard currency revenues typically are

the major means of paying for imports of consumer and capital goods needed for economic development and poverty reduction. Saudi Arabia earned approximately \$100 billion from oil sales in 2004. During the 1950 and 1960s, the copper produced in Chile by the Anaconda and Kennecott corporations ranged from 7 percent to 20 percent annually of Chilean GDP, 10 to 40 percent of government tax revenues, and 30 to 80 percent of all hard currency earnings from exports. $^{17}$ The most vexing problem for LDCs has been that even if a fair market price is the basis of their royalty earnings, capital flows alone have never been sufficient to guarantee economic prosperity and social stability.

Secondary Sector A major milestone in the evolution of the international economy was reached in the 1960s with the onset of a numerical and geographic proliferation of FDI in the secondary, or manufacturing sector. The subsequently rapid growth in the output of the overseas subsidiaries of manufacturing companies relative to domestic output and exporting was a critical ingredient in the internationalization of economic activity. By the mid-1970s, manufacturing MNCs had eclipsed those in the primary sector to become the face of FDI and the focal point in the public debate about it. Critics usually cite the manufacturing sector when expressing their opposition to MNCs, be it exploitation of workers, increased pollution, reduced competition, crowding out of domestic businesses, or erosion in national sovereignty. Debates about the contribution of incoming FDI to economic development, poverty reduction, shifts in international trade flows, and the need for technology transfers also tend to be couched in terms of what manufacturing MNCs do or do not do.

FDI in the secondary sector is dissimilar to that of the primary sector in several important respects. First, it involves possible economic dislocations in the home country. The labor force might shrink in the short run (or longer during periods of economic stagnation) if domestic production lines are closed because overseas production has been selected as the means of serving customers in the host and/or home countries. Even if total unemployment does not increase, job losses due to foreign competition are always a politically sensitive issue for elected representatives of the people. Second, host countries find incoming manufacturing FDI to be particularly appealing because as a group, these companies have demonstrated a greater willingness to reinvest profits, expand operations, and increase jobs in host countries than the other sectors. Incoming subsidiaries of manufacturers that are market-seeking (see previous discussion) tend to be the most economically beneficial to host countries because of the near certainty that they will employ skilled workers (and train them if necessary) and pay them above-average salaries. A final difference is that unlike resource-seeking investments, the pioneers of manufacturing MNCs built foreign subsidiaries in other industrialized countries.

Companies in nearly every subsector of manufacturing have now become multinational, some to protect overseas markets, some to cut production costs, and some to do both. High-tech companies (information technology, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals, heavy machinery, and so on) are avid overseas investors because their need to amortize high fixed costs and hold down per unit costs requires achieving economies of scale through maximum sales volume. Manufacturing industries with more than \$75 billion of inward FDI stock at year end 2003 were chemicals and chemical products; motor vehicles and other transport equipment; electrical and electronic equipment; processed food, beverages, and tobacco; metal and metal products; machinery and equipment; wood and wood products; and petroleum and fuels. $^{18}$ Not all MNCs in the secondary sector are traditional manufacturers. Like most large publishing houses, Oxford University Press, the publisher of this book, is a multinational, operating sales offices in more than 50 countries and printing facilities in 13 countries. $^{19}$ Three manufacturing sectors are noticeably absent from overseas investment: steel, textiles, and apparel. Not by coincidence, they are three of the most vociferous, longstanding seekers of import protection among all industries in the United States and elsewhere.

Tertiary Sector The fastest growing segment of FDI since the beginning of the 1990s has been services, also known as the tertiary sector. Its relatively vigorous and sustained growth spurt was sufficient to propel this sector to the largest category of worldwide FDI. Reaching an estimated level of \$5.2 trillion at the end of 2003, the worldwide value of inward FDI stock by services sector companies accounted for approximately 60 percent of the worldwide total, up from 25 percent in the early 1970s. (FDI in the secondary sector declined to a share of about 34 percent in 2003, and the primary sector accounted for about 7 percent of global inward FDI) $^{20}$

The relatively recent growth spurt in the tertiary sector was caused by a different mix of factors than those that acted as catalysts for increased direct investment by manufacturing and raw materials companies. Services have become the fastest growing sector by far within the GDPs of the wealthiest industrialized countries. One reason for this is the constant stream of new kinds of services that find a ready market among increasingly affluent customers with more leisure time.

FDI activity by tertiary sector companies has been given a major boost by technological advances, particularly in information processing and telecommunications, which have allowed a growing array of service industries to operate efficiently on a global basis. Relatively new entrants include data transmission, overnight freight deliveries, and back office support centers. A whole new subset of MNC that is increasingly making its presence felt on a global basis consists of

Internet-based companies like Yahoo!, Google, Amazon.com, and eBay, who have set up overseas subsidiaries to handle content, sales, customer support, and market research efforts. More recent entrants into multinational business are the U.S.-based gambling companies Las Vegas Sands Corporation and Wynn Resorts, who are building casinos in Macau and Singapore.

No limit is in sight for the kinds of innovative services that can be provided on a multinational basis. Foreign-based companies that manage regional water supplies and operate toll roads and bridges, once a curiosity, are becoming common. Press reports in 2005 noted that a U.S.-based operator of senior citizen housing complexes had opened facilities abroad and that Laureate Education had expanded the number of college campuses it owned overseas. This new wave of service companies joined long-established, still expanding MNCs in tourism, passenger and freight transportation, banking and finance, wholesaling and distributing, insurance, construction, and energy exploration and transmission services.

A third source of growth in services MNCs has been the need for and opportunities provided to banking, accounting, legal, advertising, and other business services to set up branches close to the proliferating overseas presence of their manufacturing sector clients. Another factor is the steady increase in consumers' discretionary income throughout much of the world that induced many retailers, restaurant and specialty food chains, health care providers, and cable networks to become MNCs. Finally, the expanding trend of privatization of government-owned enterprises post-1980s caused a surge in overseas investment by what had traditionally been the most home-bound of corporations: transportation and utilities providing electricity, water, natural gas, and telecommunications.

FDI in the services sector shares relatively few of the characteristics attributable to MNCs in the primary and secondary sectors. The tertiary sector has much less scope than manufacturers for traditional exporting. In some cases, such as in construction, resorts,and oil drilling,the services rendered personify the economic concept of nontradability,that is,services providers must physically be present in the place where their product is consumed. The prevalence of the nontradability syndrome has precluded controversy about services-oriented FDI displacing exports from home countries. Conversely,no claims can be made, as they are in the secondary sector, that overseas services subsidiaries generate a high volume of alternative exports from the home country in the forms of components,machinery, and models of goods not being produced abroad.

MNC critics traditionally did not accuse FDI in the services sector of causing substantial job losses in the headquarters country. Part of the reason was nontradability; another part was the propensity of service companies to send accountants, lawyers, advertising copy writers, and senior supervisory personnel from headquarters to serve a temporary overseas assignment. White-collar

workers did not feel the same sense of vulnerability that workers on the factory floor did. No data exist to suggest that the former received the same threats from employers as did blue-collar workers that entire production lines would be transferred to low-wage countries if demands for increases in wages and benefits were not restrained.

The exemption long given to service sector FDI from criticism alleging losses in home country jobs came to an abrupt end in the early years of the new millennium. A heated backlash, mainly in the United States, erupted almost overnight against international outsourcing (a term that usually denotes an arm's-length transaction between two companies in different countries). More specifically, the target of heated finger-pointing has been offshoring (see chapter 13). Also lacking a single, precise definition, this term refers to a decision by a local company to shift service functions being performed in the headquarters country to a subsidiary located in a lower wage country or to a different company in a different country. $^{21}$ Advances in information and communications technologies have caused great distances to become irrelevant to a growing number of services sectors. An x-ray can be evaluated quickly and cheaply by a radiologist 10,000 miles from the patient, and software code can be written almost anywhere and transmitted quickly and cheaply to any other point on the planet. This trend has helped launch a new attack on the theory of free trade (see chapter 11). Some have agonized that if very high-skilled, high-income service jobs are going to be shifted overseas to further fatten corporate bottom lines, the irreversible unraveling of America's high standard of living has begun.

In the past, services companies established overseas subsidiaries solely as part of market-seeking strategies. The efficiency-seeking strategy (offshoring) is still in its infancy, and resource- and strategic asset-seeking are statistically irrelevant as foreign investment motives. Overseas subsidiaries of service companies have not been accused of being part of the alleged race to the bottom. They do not engage in activities that pollute the environment (think of accountants or executive job recruiters working in a modern office building). They seldom have been accused of exploiting local workers or imposing sweatshop conditions. Except for a few big retailers like Wal-Mart, service MNCs have not been loudly criticized for crowding out local business establishments. Foreign subsidiaries in the service sector are not associated with lost jobs and exports in the home country; in many cases, such as hotel chains, lawyers, journalists, and retailers, new positions for expatriates from the headquarters country would be created. An additional factor muting public criticism is that many service multinationals, for example, wholesalers, distributors, and trading companies, have a low profile and are largely shielded from public view.

McDonald's, Starbucks, MTV, and Disney exemplify the main criticism of the new wave of tertiary sector FDI: alleged threats to the integrity of local
