Job 36:15 ... rescues those who s.
Mark 8:31 ... Son of Man must s many
Luke 24:26 ... would have to s all these
Luke 24:46 ... Messiah would s and die
Rom 8:18 ... Yet what we s now is nothing
1 Cor 12:26 ... If one part s-s, all the parts
2 Cor 1:5 ... the more we s for Christ,
2 Cor 12:10 ... troubles that t s for Christ.
Phil 3:10 ... I want to s with him, sharing
2 Thes 1:4 ... and hardships you are s-ing.
Heb 11:26 ... better to s for the sake
1 Pet 2:21 ... just as Christ s-ed for you.
1 Pet 4:1 ... since Christ s-ed physical pain
1 Pet 4:16 ... is no shame to s for being
1 Pet 5:10 ... So after you have s-ed a little
Rev 2:3 ... You have patiently s-ed for me

SUFFERING, SUFFERINGS (n) the state or experience of one that suffers; pain, distress Deut 16:3 ... the bread of s--so that Job 36:15 ... means of their s, he rescues Ps 119:71 ... My s was good for me, Isa 48:10 ... you in the furnace of s. Isa 49:13 ... on them in their s. Lam 1:12 ... if there is any s like mine, Luke 22:15 ... you before my s begins. 2 Cor 1:7 ... as you share in our s-s, you Phil 1:29 ... the privilege of s for him. Col 1:24 ... participating in the s-s of 2 Tim 2:3 ... Endure s along with me, 2 Tim 4:5 ... afraid of s for the Lord. Heb 2:10 ... through his s, a perfect Heb 2:18 ... gone through s and testing, 1 Pet 1:11 ... about Christ's s and his 1 Pet 4:13 ... Christ in his s, so that

SUSTAINS (v) to keep up or prolong Heb 1:3 ... God, and he s everything by

SWADDLED, SWADDLING (KJV)
Ezek 16:4 ... salt, and wrapped in cloth
Luke 2:7 ... wrapped him snugly in strips of cloth
Luke 2:12 ... a baby wrapped snugly

SWALLOW, SWALLOWED (v) to take through the mouth and esophagus into the stomach; to envelop or absorb
Isa 25:8 ... He will s up death
Jon 1:17 ... a great fish to s Jonah.
Hab 1:13 ... while the wicked s up people
Matt 23:24 ... a gnat, but you s a camel!
1 Cor 15:54 ... fulfilled: "Death is s-ed up
2 Cor 5:4 ... bodies will be s-ed up by life.

SWORD, SWORDS(n) a handheld weapon with a long blade; figurative of war or persecution by government, also of God's word in spiritual warfare
Gen 3:24 ... a flaming s that flashed Deut 32:41 ... my flashing s and begin 1 Sam 17:45 ... come to me with s, spear 1 Sam 31:4 ... Take your s and kill me 2 Sam 12:10 ... live by the s because you 1 Kgs 20:11 ... putting on his s for battle Ps 44:6 ... not count on my s to save me. Ps 45:3 ... Put on your s, O mighty Ps 64:3 ... their tongues like s-and aim Joel 3:10 ... plowshares into s-s and your Amos 9:4 ... I will command the s to kill Mic 4:3 ... will hammer their s-s into Matt 10:34 ... not to bring peace, but a s. Matt 26:52 ... who use the s will die by Luke 2:35 ... a s will pierce your very Eph 6:17 ... take the s of the Spirit, Heb 4:12 ... sharpest two-edged s, cutting Rev 1:16 ... sharp two-edged s came Rev 19:15 ... came a sharp s to strike

SYNAGOGUE (n) the house of worship and communal center of a Jewish congregation Luke 4:16 ... to the s on the Sabbath Acts 17:2 ... he went to the s service,

## T

TABERNACLE (n) portable shrine or tent designated for the worship of God; metaphor for God dwelling among his people see also SANCTUARY, TEMPLE Exod 27:21 ... stand in the T, in front of Exod 40:2 ... Set up the T on the first Exod 40:34 ... cloud covered the T, and Exod 40:34 ... of the Lord filled the T. Num 3:29 ... area south of the T for their Heb 8:5 ... to build the T, God gave him Heb 9:11 ... more perfect T in heaven, Heb 9:21 ... blood on the T and on Rev 15:5 ... heaven, God's T, was thrown

TABLETS (n) a flat slab or plaque suited for or bearing an inscription
Exod 31:18 ... two stone t inscribed with Deut 10:5 ... and placed the t in the Ark 2 Cor 3:3 ... carved not on t of stone,

TAME (v) to reduce from a wild to a domestic state; to harness
Jas 3:7 ... People can t all kinds of
Jas 3:8 ... no one can t the tongue.

TASTE (n) the act of tasting; a sample experience

Prov 24:13 ... honeycomb is sweet to the t.
1 Pet 2:3 ... a t of the Lord's kindness.

TASTE, TASTED, TASTES (v) to become acquainted with by experience; to ascertain the flavor of by taking a little into the mouth

Ps 34:8 ... T and see that the LORD
Prov 9:17 ... eaten in secret t-s the best!
Song 2:3 ... and t his delicious fruit.
Ezek 3:3 ... I ate it, it t-d as sweet as
Col 2:21 ... Don't handle! Don't t!

TAX, TAXES (n) a charge usually of money imposed by authority on persons or property for public purposes

Matt 11:19 ... a friend of t collectors
Matt 17:24 ... teacher pay the Temple t?
Matt 22:17 ... right to pay t-es to Caesar
Rom 13:7 ... Pay your t-es and

TEACH, TEACHES, TEACHING (v) to cause to know something; to instruct by precept, example, or experience see also INSTRUCT, PREACH, TRAIN

Lev 10:11 . . . you must t the Israelites Deut 6:1 . . . commanded me to t you.

2 Chr 17:9 . . . of Judah, t-ing the people.
Job 21:22 . . . who can t a lesson to God,
Ps 37:30 . . . they t right from wrong.

Ps 51:13 . . . Then I will t your ways
Prov 15:33 . . . the LORD t-es wisdom;
Isa 2:3 . . . he will t us his ways,

Matt 5:19 ... obeys God's laws and t-es
Matt 11:29 ... Let me t you, because
Matt 15:9 ... they t man-made ideas
Matt 22:16 ... You t the way of God
Matt 28:20 ... T these new disciples to
Mark 10:1 ... as usual he was t-ing them.
Luke 11:1 ... Lord, t us to pray,

Luke 12:12 ... Holy Spirit will t you
John 14:26 ... he will t you everything
Acts 6:4 ... in prayer and t-ing the word.

Rom 15:4... Scriptures long ago to t
Rom 15:14... you can t each other all

1 Cor 2:16...knows enough to t him?

1 Cor 14:26 ... another will t, another
1 Tim 2:12 ... do not let women t men

1 Tim 3:2...he must be able to t.

2 Tim 3:16...is useful to t us what

2 Tim 3:16 . . . t-es us to do what is right.
Titus 2:15 . . . You must t these things

Heb 5:12 ... you ought to be t-ing others.
1 Jn 2:27 ... need anyone to t you what

TEACHER, TEACHERS (n) one that teaches

Job 36:22 ... Who is a t like him?
Prov 5:13 ... didn't I listen to my t-s?
Eccl 1:1 ... words of the T, King David's Matt 10:24 ... not greater than their t, Matt 23:10 ... only one t, the Messiah.
Luke 6:40 ... will become like the t.
Luke 20:46 ... these t-s of religious law!
John 13:14 ... Lord and T, have washed Rom 12:7 ... If you are a t, teach well.

1 Cor 12:28 ... third are t-s, then those Gal 6:6 ... should provide for their t-s, Eph 4:11 ... and the pastors and t-s.

2 Tim 4:3 ... look for t-s who will tell Jas 3:1 ... of you should become t-s 3 Jn 10 ... the traveling t-s, he also

TEACHING, TEACHINGS (n) something taught; doctrine see also INSTRUCTION(S), LAW(S)

Isa 8:20 ... to God's instructions and t-sf
Luke 6:47 ... listens to my t, and then
John 7:17 ... whether my t is from God
John 8:31 ... remain faithful to my t-s,
Acts 2:42 ... themselves to the apostles' t,
Eph 4:14 ... about by every wind of new t.
1 Thes 4:8 ... not disobeying human t but
2 Thes 2:15 ... grip on the t we passed on
1 Tim 1:3 ... those whose t is contrary to
1 Tim 1:10 ... contradicts the wholesome t
1 Tim 4:6 ... and the good t you have
1 Tim 4:16 ... how you live and on your t.
1 Tim 6:3 ... people may contradict our t,
2 Tim 4:2 ... your people with good t.
Titus 1:9 ... with wholesome t and show
Titus 3:8 ... insist on these t-s so that
Heb 6:1 ... stop going over the basic t-s

TEAR, TEARS (n) a drop of clear saline fluid secreted from the eye

Job 16:20 ... I pour out my t-s to God.
Isa 25:8 ... will wipe away all t-s.

Rev 7:17 ... will wipe every t from their
Rev 21:4 ... will wipe every t from their

TEMPER (n) calmness of mind; proneness to anger

Ps 37:8...Do not lose your t-it only
Prov 14:29...t shows great foolishness.

Prov 19:11 ... people control their t; Eccl 7:9 ... Control your t, for anger

Judg 3:1... and to t those Israelites
1 Kgs 10:1... she came to t him with hard
Job 2:3:10... when he t-s me, I will come
Ps 17:3... You have t-ed my thoughts
Ps 66:10... You have t-ed us,
Ps 78:18... They stubbornly t-ed God in
Ps 106:14... ran wild, t-ing God's patience
Ps 139:23... t me and know my anxious
Prov 17:3... the Lord t-s the heart.
Luke 4:12... You must not t the Lord your
Acts 5:9... of conspiring to t the Spirit
1 Thes 5:2.1... but t everything that is said.
Heb 2:18... suffering and t-ing, he is able
Heb 2:18... us when we are being t-ed,
Heb 3:8... they t-ed me in the wilderness.
Heb 11:17... when God was t-ing him.
Jas 1:3... when your faith is t-ed, your
Jas 1:12... who patiently endure t-ing and
1 Pet 1:7... It is the test t-ing as fire tests
1 Jin 4:1... You must t them to see if
Rev 2:10... you into prison to t you.
Rev 3:10... great time of t-ing that will

TESTIFY, TESTIFIED, TESTIFIES,
TESTIFYING (v) to make a statement
based on personal knowledge or belief; to
give evidence or proof
Exod 20:16 ... must not t falsely against
Deut 5:20 ... must not t falsely against
Prov 24:28 ... Don't r against your
Luke 18:20 ... You must not t falsely.
John 1:34 ... Jesus, so I r that he is
John 5:32 ... else is also t-ing about me,
John 15:26 ... Father and will t all about
John 18:37 ... the world to t to the truth.
John 21:24 ... one who t-les to these events
Acts 4:33 ... The apostles t-led powerfully
Acts 10:43 ... the prophets t-led about,
Jn 1:41 ... own eyes and now t that the

TESTIMONY (n) the evidence given by a witness see also TESTIFY
Num 35:30 ... to death on the t of only
John 1:7 ... might believe because of his t.
1 Tim 6:13 ... gave a good t before Pontius
1 Jn 5:9 ... Since we believe human t,
Rev 12:11 ... of the Lamb and by their t.

THANK, THANKING (v) to express gratitude to; to acknowledge God's goodness
Ps 35:18 ... Then I will t you in front
Ps 79:13 ... pasture, will t you forever
Ps 145:10 ... works will t you, LORD,
Isa 12:4 ... sing: "T the LORD!

1 Cor 10:30 ... If I can t God for the food Phil 4:6 ... and t him for all he has done.
1 Thes 2:13 ... we never stop t-ing God
1 Thes 3:9 ... How we t God for you!

THANKFUL (adj) conscious of benefit received; expressive of thanks
Col 3:15 ... And always be t.
Col 3:16 ... to God with t hearts.
1 Thes 5:18 ... Be t in all circumstances,
Heb 12:28 ... let us be t and please God by

THANKS (n) kindly or grateful thoughts; gratitude
1 Chr 16:4 ... to give t, and to praise
Ps 30:12 ... I will give you t forever!
Ps 107:1 ... Give t to the Lord,
Rom 1:21 ... as God or even give him t.
1 Cor 11:24 ... gave t to God for it.
Phil 1:3 ... of you, I give t to my God.
1 Tim 2:1 ... behalf, and give t for them.
1 Tim 4:3 ... be eaten with t by faithful
Rev 4:9 ... and honor and t to the one

THANKSGIVING (n) a prayer expressing gratitude; a public acknowledgment or celebration of God's goodness.
Ps 26:7 ... singing a song of t and telling
Ps 28:7 ... I burst out in songs of t.
Ps 100:4 ... Enter his gates with t; go
Isa 51:3 ... Songs of t will fill the air.

THIEF, THIEVES (n) one that steals, especially stealthily or secretly
Prov 6:30 ... might be found for a t
Prov 29:24 ... If you assist a t, you only
Jer 7:11 ... has become a den of t-ves?
Matt 6:19 ... where t-ves break in and steal.
Luke 19:46 ... turned it into a den of t-ves.
John 10:1 ... surely be a t and a robber!
John 10:8 ... me were t-ves and robbers.
1 Cor 6:10 ... or are t-ves, or greedy people,
1 Thes 5:2 ... unexpectedly, like a t in the
Rev 16:15 ... as unexpectedly as a t!

THINK, THINKING, THINKS (v) to reflect, ponder, or remember; to subject to the processes of logical thought; to have as an opinion; to conceive or reason see also MEDITATE, THOUGHT
1 Sam 12:24 ... T of all the wonderful
2 Chr 19:6 ... Always t carefully before
Ps 8:4 ... you should f about them,
Ps 63:6 ... I lie awake t-ing of you,
Ps 77:12 ... I cannot stop t-ing about your
Ps 119:97 ... It about them all day long.

Ps 119:148 ... the night, t-ing about your Prov 13:16 ... Wise people t before they Prov 15:28 ... godly t-s carefully before Prov 21:29 ... the virtuous t before they Prov 23:7 ... are always t-ing about how Prov 29:20 ... who speaks without t-ing. Isa 44:18 ... are shut, and they cannot t. Matt 22:42 ... What do you f about the Rom 11:20 ... So don't t highly of Phil 1:3 ... Every time I t of you, I give Phil 2:3 ... Be humble, t-ing of others as Phil 3:19 ... they t only about this life Heb 10:24 ... Let us t of ways to motivate I Pet 1:13 ... So t clearly and exercise

## THIRST (v) to crave vehemently and urgently

Ps 42:2 . . . I t for God, the living God.

Matt 5:6...who hunger and t for justice,

## THIRSTY (adj) feeling a desire for liquids; having a strong desire

Ps 107:9...he satisfies the t and fills

Prov 25:21...If they are t, give them

Isa 55:1...Is anyone t? Come and drink--

Matt 25:35...I was t, and you gave

John 4:14...will never be t again.

Rom 12:20...If they are t, give them

2 Cor 11:27...been hungry and t and

Rev 7:16...never again be hungry or t;

Rev 22:17...Let anyone who is t come.

THORN, THORNS (n) a woody plant bearing sharp impeding prickles or spines; something that causes distress or irritation Gen 3:18 ... It will grow t-s and thistles Num 33:55 ... in your eyes and t-s in your Matt 13:7 ... seeds fell among t-s that Matt 27:29 ... wove t branches into a 2 Cor 12:7 ... I was given a t in my flesh, Heb 6:8 ... a field bears t-s and thistles,

THOUGHT, THOUGHTS (n) the action or process of thinking; a developed intention or plan; recollection, remembrance
Ps 77:12 ... They are constantly in my t-s.
Ps 92:5 ... And how deep are your t-s.
Ps 94:11 ... Lord knows people's t-s;
Ps 104:34 ... May all my t-s be pleasing
Ps 139:23 ... and know my anxious t-s.
Ps 142:4 ... no one gives me a passing t!
Isa 26:3 ... whose t-s are fixed on you!
Isa 55:8 ... My t-s are nothing like your
Matt 9:4 ... you have such evil t-s in your
Matt 15:19 ... heart come evil t-s, murder,

1 Cor 14:25 ... their secret t-s will be
Eph 4:23 ... renew your t-s and attitudes.
Rev 2:23 ... searches out the t-s and

## THRONE, THRONES (n) seat of power for a king or deity; symbolic of royal authority and the king's role as a judge

Deut 17:18...he sits on the t as king,

2 Sam 7:16...and your t will be secure

1 Chr 17:12...will secure his t forever.

Job 36:7...sets them on t-s with kings

Ps 45:6...Your t,O God, endures

Ps 47:8 . . . nations, sitting on his holy t.

Ps 89:14...are the foundation of your t.

Ps 99:1...He sits on his t between the

Ps 102:12...sit on your t forever.

Ps 103:19...has made the heavens his t;

Isa 6:1... He was sitting on a lofty t,

Isa 66:1... Heaven is my t, and the

Dan 7:9...on a fiery t with wheels

Matt 19:28...upon his glorious t, you who

Matt 19:28...sit on twelve t-s, judging

Acts 7:49... Heaven is my t, and the

Rom 15:12...heir to David's t will come,

Col 1:16... such as t-s, kingdoms, rulers,

Heb 12:2... place of honor beside God's t.

Rev 3:21...sat with my Father on his t.

Rev 4:2... and I saw a t in heaven

Rev 4:4... Twenty-four t-s surrounded

Rev 5:5...heir to David's t, has won

Rev 20:11...a great white t and the

Rev 22:3... the t of God and of the Lamb

TIME, TIMES (n) occasion; an opportune or suitable moment; an appointed, fixed, or customary moment or hour for something to happen, begin, or end; duration; conditions at present or at some specified period; added or accumulated quantities or instances

Esth 4:14...keep quiet at a t like this,

Ps 9:9...a refuge in t-s of trouble.

Ps 62:8... trust in him at all t-s.

Eccl 3:1...a t for every activity under

Eccl 7:14...when hard t-s strike,

Eccl 8:5...wise will find a t and a way

Dan 12:7...times,and half a t.

Hos 10:12...for now is the t to seek the

Amos 5:13...shut, for it is an evil t.

Matt 16:3...interpret the signs of the t-s!

Matt 18:21...sins against me? Seven t-s?

Luke 12:40...ready all the t, for the Son

John 4:53...was the very t Jesus had told

John 12:23...the t has come for the Son

Acts 1:7 ... those dates and t-s, and they Acts 18:5 ... spent all his t preaching  
1 Cor 7:29... The t that remains is very  
2 Cor 6:2... the "right t" is now.  
Gal 6:9,.. just the right t we will reap  
2 Tim 1:9... the beginning of t-to show  
Heb 9:28...once for all t as a sacrifice  
Heb 10:12...for sins,good for all t.  
1 Pet 4:17...For the t has come for  
Rev 12:14...for a time,t-s,and half a

TIRED (adj) drained of strength and energy

Exod 17:12...became so t he could no

Isa 35:3...those who have t hands,

Gal 6:9...let's not get t of doing what

2 Thes 3:13...never get t of doing good.

Heb 12:12...new grip with your t hands

TITHE, TITHES (n) one-tenth of any property or produce see also TENTH

Num 18:21...give them the t-s from the

Deut 12:17...neither the t of your grain

2 Chr 31:12...brought all the t-s and

Amos 4:4...bring your t-s every three

Mal 3:8...of the t-s and offerings due

Mal 3:10...Bring all the t-s into the

TITHE (v) to pay or give a tenth of as an offering to God

Matt 23:23...You should t,yes,

Luke 11:42...you are careful to t even the

TOMORROW (n) the day after the present; the future

Prov 27:1...Don't brag about t, since you

Isa 22:13...and drink,for t.we die!

Rom 8:38...our worries about t--not even

TONGUE, TONGUES (n) part of the mouth that enables speech; dialect or language of a people; a special gift of speech given by the Holy Spirit see also LANGUAGE(S)

Ps 5:9... Their t-s are filled

Ps 34:13...keep your t from speaking

Ps 39:1...I will hold my t when

Ps 45:1...king,for my t is like

Ps 78:36...lied to him with their t-s.

Ps 119:172...Let my t sing about

Ps 137:6...May my t stick to the

Prov 13:3... who control their t will have

Prov 15:4...a deceitful t crushes the

Prov 17:20...the lying t tumbles into

Prov 21:23... Watch your t and keep

Luke 16:24...in water and cool my t.

Acts 2:3...like flames or t-s of fire

Acts 10:46 ... speaking in t-s and praising Acts 19:6 ... in other t-s and prophesied.  
Rom 14:11...me,and every t will confess  
1 Cor 14:2...to speak in t-s, you will  
1 Cor 14:4... speaks in t-s is strengthened  
1 Cor 14:5... speak in t-s, but even more  
1 Cor 14:13...speaks in t-s should pray  
1 Cor 14:18...I speak in t-s more than  
1 Cor 14:27...three should speak in t-s.  
1 Cor 14:39...forbid speaking in t-s.  
Phil 2:11...and every t confess that  
Jas 3:2...if we could control our t-s,we  
Jas 3:5...same way,the t is a small

TORTURED (v) to punish or coerce by inflicting excruciating pain

Matt 18:34...prison to be t until he

Heb 11:35...others were t,refusing to

TOUCH, TOUCHED, TOUCHES (v) to reach out or come in contact with; to lay hands upon; to have an influence upon

Gen 3:3... must not eat it or even t it;

Exod 19:12 ... or even t its boundaries.

Exod 19:12 ... Anyone who t-es the mountain

Isa 6:7...this coal has t-ed your lips.

Matt 9:21...If I can just t his robe,

Matt 14:36...who t-ed him were healed.

Luke 8:45... "Who t-ed me?" Jesus asked.

Luke 18:15...so he could t and bless

Luke 24:39...T me and make sure that

2 Cor 6:17...Don't t their filthy things,

Col 2:21...Don't taste! Don't t!"?

1 Jn 1:1...t-ed him with our own hands.

1 Jn 5:18... evil one cannot t them.

TRADE, TRADED (v) to give one thing in exchange for another

Gen 25:31...Jacob replied,"but t me your

Ps 106:20... They t-d their glorious God

Rom 1:25... They t-d the truth about God

TRADITION, TRADITIONS (n) an inherited, customary, or established pattern of thought, action, or behavior

Matt 15:6...for the sake of your own t.

Mark 7:5...disciples follow our age-old t?

Mark 7:8...law and substitute your own t.

Mark 7:13...to hand down your own t.

Gal 1:14...in my zeal for the t-s of my

TRAIN, TRAINED (v) to form by or undergo instruction, discipline, or drill see also TEACH

Isa 2:4...against nation,nor t for war

Luke 6:40 ... who is fully t-ed will become John 7:15 ... when he hasn't been t-ed? Acts 22:3 ... I was carefully t-ed in our 1 Tim 4:7 ... t yourself to be godly. Titus 2:4 ... women must t the younger Heb 12:11 ... those who are t-ed in this way.

TRAMPLE, TRAMPLED (v) to crush, injure, or destroy by or as if by treading
Ps 60:12 ... for he will t down our foes.
Ps 91:13 ... You will t upon lions
Amos 5:11 ... You t the poor,
Amos 8:4 ... rob the poor and t down the
Mic 4:13 ... so you can t many nations to
Mic 7:19 ... You will t our sins under
Matt 7:6 ... They will t the pearls,
Luke 21:24 ... Jerusalem will be t-d down
Heb 10:29 ... who have t-d on the Son
Rev 14:20 ... The grapes were t-d in the

## TRANSFIGURED (KJV)

Matt 17:2 ... Jesus' appearance was transformed
Mark 9:2 ... Jesus' appearance was transformed

TRANSFORM, TRANSFORMED (v) to change the outward appearance of; to change in character or condition Matt 17:2 ... appearance was t-ed so that Rom 12:2 ... let God t you into a new 1 Cor 15:51 ... but we will all be t-ed!

TRANSGRESSED, TRANSGRESSION (KJV)
Josh 7:11 ... and broken my covenant
1 Chr 5:25 ... tribes were unfaithful
1 Chr 10:13 ... because he was unfaithful
Rom 4:15 ... to avoid breaking the law
1 Jn 3:4 ... all sin is contrary to the law

TRAP, TRAPS (n) something by which one is caught or stopped unaware; a position or situation from which it is difficult or impossible to escape; a device for taking game or other animals
Deut 7:25 ... will become a t to you,
Deut 12:30 ... fall into the r of following
Ps 91:3 ... you from every f and protect
Prov 1:17 ... a bird sees a t being set,
Prov 3:26 ... foot from being caught in a t.
Prov 28:10 ... into their own t, but the
Prov 29:5 ... is to lay a t for their feet.
Prov 29:25 ... a dangerous t, but trusting
Isa 8:14 ... he will be a t and a snare.
Isa 24:17 ... Terror and t-s and snares will

Matt 16:23 ... are a dangerous t to me.
Rom 11:9 ... a snare, a t that makes them
1 Tim 3:7 ... into the devil's t.
2 Tim 2:26 ... from the devil's t.

TRAP, TRAPPED, TRAPS (v) to catch or take in or as if in a trap
Ps 7:15 ... a deep pit to t others, then
Ps 9:16 ... wicked are t-ped by their own
Prov 6:2 ... if you have t-ped yourself by
Prov 12:13 ... wicked are t-ped by their
Prov 18:7 ... they t themselves with
Matt 22:15 ... to plot how to t Jesus into
1 Cor 3:19 ... He t-s the wise in the snare
1 Tim 6:9 ... temptation and are t-ped by

TREASURE, TREASURES (n) wealth or a collection of precious things; something of great value
Exod 19:5 ... my own special t from Deut 7:6 ... to be his own special t. 1 Chr 29:3 ... my own private t-s of gold Ps 119:111 ... Your laws are my t; they Ps 135:4 ... Israel for his own special t. Prov 2:4 ... seek them like hidden t-s. Prov 18:22 ... finds a wife finds a t, Song 4:10 ... delights me, my t, my bride. Isa 10:3 ... Where will your t-s be safe? Hag 2:7 ... the t-s of all the nations Mal 3:17 ... they will be my own special t. Matt 6:19 ... Don't store up t-s here on Matt 6:21 ... Wherever your t is, there Matt 13:44 ... Heaven is like a t that a man Luke 12:33 ... will store up t for you in 2 Cot 4:7 ... jars containing this great t. Eph 3:8 ... the endless t-s available to Col 2:3 ... hidden all the t-s of wisdom 1 Tim 6:19 ... storing up their t as a good Heb 11:26 ... to own the t-s of Egypt, for

TREASURE, TREASURED (v) to hold or keep as precious
Job 23:12 ... but have t-d his words more
Prov 2:1 ... I say, and t my commands.
Prov 7:1 ... always t my commands.
Prov 10:14 ... Wise people t knowledge,

TREASURY (n) a place in which stores of wealth are kept
Deut 28:12 ... time from his rich t in the Luke 6:45 ... things from the t of a good

TREE, TREES (n) woody perennial plants, many of which produce crops; highly treasured natural resource; often linked

with worship of pagan gods; symbolic of a growing believer

Gen 2:9...he placed the t of life and

Deut 21:23...from the t overnight.

Judg 9:8...the t-s decided to elect

2 Sam 18:9...got caught in the t.

1 Kgs 14:23...and under every green t.

Ps 1:3...They are like t-s planted along

Ps 52:8...like an olive t, thriving in

Ps 92:12...like palm t-s and grow

Ps 96:12...Let the t-s of the forest

Prov 3:18...Wisdom is a t of life to

Prov 11:30...deeds become a t of life;

Isa 55:12...and the t-s of the field

Isa 65:22...people will live as long as t-s,

Jer 17:8...They are like t-s planted along

Dan 4:10... saw a large t in the middle

Mic 4:4...and fig t-s,for there will be

Matt 3:10...sever the roots of the t-s.

Matt 3:10...every t that does not produce

Matt 12:33...t is identified by its fruit.

Mark 8:24...look like t-s walking

Luke 19:4...a sycamore-fig t beside the

Rom 11:24...cut from a wild olive t.

Gal 3:13...everyone who is hung on a t.

Jas 3:12... Does a fig t produce olives,

Jude 12...They are like t-s in autumn

Rev 22:2...the river grew a t of life,

Rev 22:14... the fruit from the t of life.

Rev 22:19... share in the t of life and

## TREMBLE, TREMBLED, TREMBLES,

TREMBLING (v) to be affected with great fear or anxiety; to shake involuntarily

Exod 15:14...hear and t; anguish grips

Exod 19:16...horn, and all the people t-d.

Exod 20:18...a distance,t-ing with fear.

2 Sam 22:8...the earth quaked and t-d.

1 Chr 16:30... all the earth t before him.

Ps 2:11...fear,and rejoice with t-ing.

Ps 97:4...The earth sees and t-s.

Ps 102:15...the earth will t before his

Ps 104:32...The earth t-s at his glance;

Isa 66:2...contrite hearts,who t at my

Jer 10:10...whole earth t-s at his anger.

Dan 10:10...and lifted me,still t-ing,

Joel 2:1... Let everyone t in fear

Nah 1:5...hills melt away;the earth t-s,

Hab 3:6...the nations t.He shatters

Heb 4:1...we ought to t with fear that

Heb 12:21...I am terrified and t-ing.

## TRESPASS(ES)(KJV)

Lev 19:21...a ram as a guilt offering

2 Chr 24:18...Because of this sin, divine

Matt 18:15...believer sins against you,

Matt 6:15 ... Father will not forgive your sins

Eph 2:1...because of your disobedience

TRIAL, TRIALS (n) a legal proceeding based in court; a test of faith, patience, or stamina through subjection to suffering or temptation see also TEMPTATION(S), TEST(S), TROUBLE(S)

Job 42:11...all the t-s the LORD had

Ps 26:2...Put me on t, LORD,

Ps 37:33...when they are put on t.

Ps 143:2...Don't put your servant on t,

Mark 13:11...and stand t,don't worry in

Luke 22:28...with me in my time of t.

John 16:33...have many t-s and sorrows.

Rom 5:3...into problems and t-s, for we

1 Pet 1:7...through many t-s,it will

1 Pet 4:12... the fiery t-s you are going

2 Pet 2:9...from their t-s,even while

## TRICKERY(n) deception

Isa 29:21...those who use t to pervert

2 Cor 12:16...advantage of you by t.

TROUBLE, TROUBLES (n) a state,
condition, or cause of distress, annoyance,
difficulty, or inconvenience see also TEST(S),
TRIAL(S)

Gen 41:51...made me forget all my t-s

Josh 7:25...have you brought t on us?

2 Chr 15:4...they were in t and turned

Job 5:7...are born for t as readily as

Ps 7:14...they are pregnant with t

Ps 9:9...a refuge in times of t.

Ps 10:14...you see the t and grief

Ps 22:11...from me,for t is near,

Ps 27:5...me there when t-s come;

Ps 32:7...you protect me from t.

Ps 34:17... them from all their t-s.

Ps 37:39...their fortress in times of t.

Ps 40:12...For t-s surround me--

Ps 41:1... them when they are in t.

Ps 46:1...ready to help in times of t.

Ps 49:5...I fear when t comes,when

Ps 50:15...when you are in t, and I will

Ps 54:7...have rescued me from my t-s

Ps 55:3...They bring t on me

Ps 66:14...I was in deep t.

Ps 81:7...cried to me in t, and

Ps 86:7...whenever I'm in t, and

Ps 91:15...I will be with them in t.

Ps 107:6 ... they cried in their t,  
Ps 107:41...rescues the poor from t  
Ps 116:3...I saw only t and sorrow.  
Ps 120:1 ... took my t-s to the LORD;  
Ps 138:7...I am surrounded by t-s, you  
Prov 6:14...they constantly stir up t.  
Prov 10:10...who wink at wrong cause t,  
Prov 11:8...godly are rescued from t,  
Prov 11:29... Those who bring t on their  
Prov 12:13...the godly escape such t.  
Prov 12:21... wicked have their fill of t.  
Prov 13:20...with fools and get in t.  
Prov 25:19... in times of t is like chewing  
Eccl 4:10...falls alone is in real t.  
Isa 38:14...I am in t, LORD. Help me!  
Isa 53:4... And we thought his t-s were  
Isa 58:10...and help those in t.  
Hos 5:15...as soon as t comes,they  
Nah 1:7...strong refuge when t comes.  
Matt 6:34...Today's t is enough  
Rom 8:35... if we have t or calamity,  
1 Cor 7:28...at this time will have t-s,  
2 Cor 4:17...our present t-s are small  
2 Cor 6:4... We patiently endure t-s and  
2 Cor 7:4...me happy despite all our t-s.  
2 Cor 8:2... being tested by many t-s,  
1 Thes 3:3...shaken by the t-s you were  
1 Tim 6:5... These people always cause t.  
Jas 1:2...when t-s come your way,  
Jas 5:1...all the terrible t-s ahead

TRUE (adj) fully realized or fulfilled; accurate; properly so called; steadfast, loyal, honest, and just; ideal, essential; being in accordance with the actual state of affairs; legitimate, rightful

Num 11:23...my word comes t!

Deut 18:22...does not happen or come t, Josh 23:14...your God has come t.

1 Sam 9:6...everything he says comes t.

1 Kgs 10:6...and wisdom is t!

2 Chr 15:3...without the t God,

Ps 7:10... hearts are t and right.

Ps 19:9...laws of the LORD are t;

Ps 119:142...instructions are perfectly t.

Ps 119:151...your commands are t.

Isa 45:19...speak only what is t and

Jer 10:10...is the only t God.

Jer 26:15...it is absolutely t that

Jer 28:9...when his predictions come t

Luke 16:11...the t riches of heaven?

Luke 18:31...Son of Man will come t.

John 1:9...one who is the t light,

John 3:33...can affirm that God is t.  
John 4:23...t worshipers will worship  
John 6:32...offers you the t bread  
John 6:55...my flesh is t food, and  
John 7:28...one who sent me is t,  
John 15:1...I am the t grapevine,  
John 17:3...know you,the only t God,  
Rom 3:4...else is a liar, God is t.  
Rom 15:8... God is t to the promises  
Eph 5:9...is good and right and t.  
Phil 4:1...stay t to the Lord.  
Phil 4:8...thoughts on what is t,  
Jas 1:18...giving us his t word.  
1 Jn 2:8 ... the t light is already  
1 In 2:27 ... to teach you what is t.  
1 Jn 5:20...He is the only t God,  
Rev 19:9... These are t words that come  
Rev 22:6...seen is trustworthy and t.

TRUMPET, TRUMPETS (n) a wind instrument made of metal or an animal horn used to rally troops on the battlefield or by priests during sacrifices

Isa 27:13 ... the great t will sound.

Matt 24:31...blast of a t, and they will

1 Cor 15:52...when the last t is blown.

1 Thes 4:16...with the t call of God.

Rev 8:2 ... they were given seven t-s.

Rev 8:7 ... angel blew his t, and hail

Rev 18:22 ... flutes, and t-s will never

TRUST (n) assured reliance on the character, ability, strength, or truth of someone or something; hope see also BELIEVE, FAITH

Job 31:24... Have I put my t in money

Ps 40:3...put their t in the LORD.

Ps 56:3...I will put my t in you.

Isa 2:22...Don't put your t in mere

Jer 13:25...putting your t in false

Jer 17:5...who put their t in mere

John 12:46...who put their t in me

Heb 2:13 ... will put my t in him,

1 Jn 4:16... have put our t in his love.

TRUST, TRUSTED, TRUSTING, TRUSTS

(v) to place confidence or depend; to commit or place in one's care or keeping; to rely on the truthfulness or accuracy of see also BELIEVE, FAITH

Gen 39:8 . . . my master t-s me with everything

Deut 1:32...refused to t the LORD

Deut 28:52...walls you t-ed to protect  
2 Kgs 18:5 ... Hezekiah t-ed in the  
2 Kgs 18:19... What are you t-ing in that  
1 Chr 5:20... because they t-ed in him.  
2 Chr 13:18...they t-ed in the LORD,  
Job 4:18... God does not t his own angels  
Job 15:31...fool themselves by t-ing in  
Ps 13:5...It in your unfailing love.  
Ps 21:7 ... the king t-s in the LORD.  
Ps 25:2...I t in you,my God!  
Ps 25:3...No one who t-s in you will ever  
Ps 31:14...I am t-ing you, O LORD,  
Ps 33:4...we can t everything he  
Ps 37:3...T in the LORD and do  
Ps 41:9...the one I t-ed completely,  
Ps 44:6...I do not t in my bow;  
Ps 55:23...but I am t-ing you to save  
Ps 62:8...O my people,t in him at  
Ps 71:5...I've t-ed you, O LORD,  
Ps 84:12...for those who t in you.  
Ps 86:2...serve you and t you.  
Ps 112:7...confidently t the LORD  
Ps 115:8...as are all who t in them.  
Ps 118:8... LORD than to t in  
Ps 119:42...for It in your word.  
Prov 3:5...T in the LORD with  
Prov 21:22... fortress in which they t.  
Prov 28:25...t-ing the LORD leads to  
Prov 28:26...who t their own insight  
Prov 29:25...t-ing the LORD means safety.  
Prov 31:11...Her husband can t her,  
Isa 12:2...I will t in him and  
Isa 25:9...We t-ed in him, and he saved  
Isa 26:3...peace all who t in you,  
Isa 31:1... for help, t-ing their horses,  
Isa 40:31...who t in the LORD  
Jer 7:14...this Temple that you t in  
Jer 12:6 ... Do not t them, no matter  
er 48:7...Because you have t-ed in your  
Dan 3:28...his servants who t-ed in him.  
Dan 6:23...for he had t-ed in his God.  
Nah 1:7...to those who t in him.  
Hab 2:4... They t in themselves,  
Hab 2:18 ... foolish to t in your own  
Matt 18:6...little ones who t-s in me to  
John 2:24...Jesus didn't t them,  
John 12:44...you are t-ing not only me,  
John 14:1...in God,and t also in me.  
Rom 9:32...instead of by t-ing in him.  
Rom 9:33... But anyone who t-s in him will  
Rom 10:11...Anyone who t-s in him will  
Rom 15:13...peace because you t in

1 Cor 2:5 ... so you would t not in  
1 Cor 7:25...wisdom that can be t-ed,  
Eph 3:17...hearts as you t in him.  
Phil 1:29...the privilege of t-ing in Christ  
Col 2:12...because you t-ed the mighty  
1 Tim 6:17...not to t in their money,  
2 Tim 1:12...the one in whom I t,  
2 Tim 3:15 ... that comes by t-ing in Christ  
Heb 10:22... hearts fully t-ing him.  
Heb 10:23...God can be t-ed to keep his  
1 Pet 1:9...reward for t-ing him will be  
1 Pet 2:6...anyone who t-s in him will  
1 Pet 2:7...you who t him recognize

TRUSTWORTHY (adj) worthy of confidence; dependable see also FAITHFUL, LOYAL

2 Kgs 22:7...honest and t men.

Ps 19:7...of the LORD are t,

Ps 119:86... All your commands are t.

Ps 119:138...perfect and completely t.

Prov 11:13...those who are t can keep

Dan 6:4...responsible,and completely t.

Titus 2:10...to be entirely t and good.

Heb 6:19...a strong and t anchor

TRUTH, TRUTHS (n) the property (as of a statement) of being in accord with fact or reality (natural and spiritual); sincerity in action, character, and utterance

Ps 15:2...speaking the t from sincere

Ps 25:5...Lead me by your t and teach

Ps 26:3...lived according to your t.

Ps 43:3...light and your t; let them

Ps 45:4...defending t, humility, and

Ps 86:11...live according to your t!

Ps 119:160...essence of your words is t;

Prov 8:7...for I speak the t and detest

Prov 12:17...honest witness tells the t;

Prov 12:22...in those who tell the t.

Prov 23:23...Get the t and never sell

Isa 45:23...I have spoken the t,

Isa 59:15...Yes,t is gone,

Jer 4:2...do so with t,justice,

Jer 9:3...to stand up for the t.

Dan 10:21...written in the Book of T.

Dan 11:2...I will reveal the t to you.

Amos 5:10...people who tell the t!

Zech 8:16...Tell the t to each other.

Zech 8:19...So love t and peace.

Luke 1:4...can be certain of the t

John 4:23...Father in spirit and in t.

John 7:18...him speaks t, not lies.

John 8:32...the t will set you free.  
John 8:44...there is no t in him.  
John 14:6 ... way, the t, and the life.  
John 14:17...who leads into all t.  
John 15:26...Advocate--the Spirit of t.  
John 16:13...the Spirit of t comes,  
John 17:17...your word,which is t.  
John 18:37...to testify to the t.  
Acts 20:30...distort the t in order  
Acts 21:34...find out the t in all  
Acts 24:8...can find out the t of our  
Rom 1:18... who suppress the t by their  
Rom 1:25... They traded the t about God  
Rom 2:8...to obey the t and instead  
Rom 2:20...complete knowledge and t.  
1 Cor 2:13 ... to explain spiritual t-s.  
2 Cor 6:7... We faithfully preach the t.  
2 Cor 13:8...always stand for the t.  
Gal 2:5... wanted to preserve the t  
Gal 5:7... back from following the t?  
Eph 1:13...also heard the t,the Good  
Eph 4:15...will speak the t in love,  
Eph 6:14...the belt of t and the body  
2 Thes 2:10...t that would save them.  
2 Thes 2:12... rather than believing the t.  
1 Tim 2:4... and to understand the t.  
1 Tim 3:15... and foundation of the t.  
1 Tim 4:3...people who know the t.  
1 Tim 6:5... their backs on the t.  
2 Tim 2:15... explains the word of t.  
2 Tim 3:7...able to understand the t.  
Titus 1:14...turned away from the t.  
Heb 10:26 . . . received knowledge of the t,  
Jas 3:14...don't cover up the t with  
Jas 5:19... wanders away from the t  
1 Pet 1:22...you obeyed the t, so now  
2 Pet 1:12...standing firm in the t  
2 Pet 2:2... the way of t will be  
1 Jn 1:8... and not living in the t.  
1 Jn 2:20...all of you know the t.  
1 Jn 3:19...belong to the t, so we  
1 Jn 4:6...Spirit of t or the spirit  
1 Jn 5:6 ... Spirit, who is t, confirms  
2 Jn 2...because the t lives  
2 Jn 3...who live in t and love.  
3 In 3...living according to the t.  
3 In 8... partners as they teach the t.

TURN, TURNED, TURNING, TURNS (v) to convert or change allegiance; to return or change direction; to face toward or away; to

divert one's attention from; to become or transform; to shape or bend  
Deut 28:14... You must not t away from  
Deut 30:10...if you t to the LORD  
1 Kgs 11:4... old age, they t-ed his heart  
2 Chr 7:14...seek my face and t from  
2 Chr 34:33...they did not t away from  
Esth 9:22...sorrow was t-ed into gladness  
Ps 14:3...no,all have t-ed away; all  
Ps 30:11... You have t-ed my mourning  
Ps 40:1...and he t-ed to me and  
Ps 119:59...I t-ed to follow your  
Ps 119:102...I haven't t-ed away from  
Prov 3:7...fear the LORD and t away  
Prov 28:13... confess and t from them,  
Isa 17:7... Creator and t their eyes to  
Isa 54:8...anger I t-ed my face away  
Isa 55:7...Let them t to the LORD  
Isa 59:2...he has t-ed away and will  
Jer 14:7... We have t-ed away from you  
Jer 31:13...I will t their mourning into  
Jer 31:19...I t-ed away from God,  
Lam 3:40...Let us t back to the LORD.  
Mal 4:6...preaching will t the hearts  
Matt 3:8...your sins and t-ed to God.  
Matt 18:3... truth, unless you t from your  
Mark 4:12... Otherwise, they will t to me  
Mark 8:34... must t from your selfish  
Luke 1:17... He will t the hearts of  
Luke 22:32...you have repented and t-ed  
John 12:40...and they cannot t to me  
John 16:20...will suddenly t to wonderful  
Acts 3:19...of your sins and t to God,  
Acts 7:42... Then God t-ed away from them  
Acts 26:18...so they may t from darkness  
Rom 1:26...Even the women t-ed against  
Rom 2:4...to t you from your sin?  
Rom 3:12...All have t-ed away;  
Gal 1:6...that you are t-ing away so  
2 Tim 2:19...Lord must t away from  
Titus 2:12... instructed to t from godless  
Heb 10:38...in anyone who t-s away.  
1 Pet 2:25...But now you have t-ed to

TWELVE (adj) of or relating to the number 12

Gen 35:22...names of the t sons of Jacob:

Gen 49:28...These are the tribes of

Matt 10:1...Jesus called his t disciples

Luke 9:17...picked up t baskets of

Rev 21:12...names of the t tribes of

Rev 21:14...names of the t apostles of

Rev 21:21...The t gates were made of

## U

UNBELIEF (n) incredulity or skepticism in matters of religious truth

Matt 13:58...there because of their u.

Mark 6:6...he was amazed at their u.

Mark 9:24...help me overcome my u!

Mark 16:14... them for their stubborn u

Rom 11:23...Israel turn from their u,

1 Tim 1:13...it in ignorance and u.

Heb 3:19...because of their u they

UNBELIEVER, UNBELIEVERS (n) one who does not believe; a non-Christian

Matt 6:32 ... dominate the thoughts of u-s,

Luke 12:30...the thoughts of u-s all over

1 Cor 6:6...right in front of u-s!

1 Cor 14:22...for believers, but for u-s.

2 Cor 6:15...,a partner with an u?

1 Tim 5:8 ... people are worse than u-s.

Rev 21:8... But cowards, u-s, the corrupt,

UNCLEAN (adj) morally or spiritually impure; prohibited by ritual law for use or contact

Lev 10:10...is ceremonially u and what is

Lev 11:4...it is ceremonially u for you.

Lev 17:15...remain ceremonially u until

Lev 27:11...vow involves an u animal--

Isa 52:11...everything you touch is u.

Acts 10:14...have declared impure and u.

Acts 10:15 ... not call something u if God

UNDERSTAND (v) to grasp the meaning or reasonableness of; to be thoroughly familiar with

Job 5:9...things too marvelous to u.

Job 36:26...is greater than we can u.

Ps 73:16... tried to u why the wicked

Ps 119:27...Help me u the meaning of

Ps 119:125...then I will u your laws.

Ps 119:130...so even the simple can u.

Prov 2:5...will u what it means to fear

Prov 2:9...you will u what is right,

Prov 28:5...the LORD u completely.

Prov 30:18...things that I don't u:

Eccl 7:25...and to u the reason

Isa 6:9...carefully, but do not u.

Isa 40:21...you heard? Don't you u?

Jer 9:24...truly know me and u that

Hos 14:9...who are wise u these things.

Matt 13:11... permitted to u the secrets

Matt 13:23...truly hear and u God's

Luke 19:42...people would u the way

Luke 24:45...minds to u the Scriptures.

Acts 8:30...Do you u what you are

Rom 7:15...I don't really u myself,

Rom 15:21...never heard of him will u.

1 Cor 2:14...and they can't u it,

1 Cor 14:14...but I don't u what I am

2 Cor 3:14...they cannot u the truth.

Gal 1:11...you to u that the gospel

Eph 1:18...you can u the confident

Eph 5:17...thoughtlessly,but u what

Phil 1:10...want you to u what really

Phil 4:7...exceeds anything we can u.

Col 2:2...that they u God's mysterious

1 Tim 2:4...saved and to u the truth.

2 Tim 2:7...will help you u all these

Heb 11:3...By faith we u that the entire

2 Pet 3:16...are hard to u, and those

UNITED (v) to become one or as if one; in one accord or spirit

Gen 2:24... the two are u into one.

Mark 10:8... the two are u into one.

Rom 6:5...we have been u with him

Rom 7:4...now you are u with the one

1 Cor 6:16... The two are u into one.

Eph 4:3 ... to keep yourselves u in the

UNITY(n) the quality or state of oneness or harmony

John 17:23...perfect u that the world

Eph 4:13...come to such u in our faith

UPRIGHT (adj) marked by strong moral integrity see also RIGHT, RIGHTEOUS

Deut 32:4...how just and u he is!

Prov 3:33...blesses the home of the u.

Prov 15:8...in the prayers of the u.

USEFUL (adj) serviceable for an end or purpose

2 Tim 3:16 . . . inspired by God and is u to

2 Pet 1:8... productive and u you will be

USELESS (adj) having or being of no use; ineffectual, inept

Acts 26:14...It is u for you to fight

1 Cor 13:8...knowledge will become u.

1 Cor 15:14...u,and your faith is u.

1 Cor 15:58...do for the Lord is ever u.

2 Tim 2:14... Such arguments are u, and

Titus 1:10...who engage in u talk and

Heb 7:18... because it was weak and u.

## V

VALLEY, VALLEYS (n) a depression in the earth's surface between ranges of mountains, hills, or other uplands Ps 23:4 ... through the darkest v, I will Song 2:1 ... lily of the v. Isa 40:4 ... Fill in the v-s, and level Joel 3:14 ... waiting in the v of decision. Luke 3:5 ... The v-s will be filled, and

VALUABLE (adj) having desirable or esteemed characteristics or qualities; of great use or service
Job 28:17 ... Wisdom is more v than gold Ps 119:72 ... instructions are more v Prov 8:11 ... is far more v than rubies. Prov 20:15 ... words are more v than Matt 10:31 ... you are more v to God than Luke 12:24 ... are far more v to him than Phil 3:7 ... these things were v, but now

VALUE (n) monetary worth of something; relative worth, utility, or importance
Matt 13:46 ... a pearl of great v, he sold
1 Cor 3:13 ... a person's work has any v.
Phil 3:8 ... the infinite v of knowing

VENGEANCE (n) punishment inflicted in retaliation for an injury or offense
1 Sam 25:26 ... taking v into your own
1 Sam 25:33 ... carrying out v with my Ps 94:1 ... O LORD, the God of v,
Isa 66:6 ... the LORD taking v against Luke 21:22 ... be days of God's v, and the

VICTORY, VICTORIES (n) the overcoming of an enemy, antagonist, or struggle Exod 15:2... he has given me v. 2 Sam 22:51... You give great v-ies to your Ps 18:50... You give great v-ies to your Ps 20:5... we hear of your v and Ps 21:1... because you give him v. Ps 35:3... I will give you v! Ps 44:4... You command v-ies for Israel. Ps 45:4... majesty, ride out to v, Ps 48:10... right hand is filled with v. Ps 62:1... for my v comes from him. Ps 98:3... have seen the v of our God. Ps 118:14... he has given me v. Ps 149:4... crowns the humble with v. Isa 12:2... he has given me v. Isa 52:10... see the v of our God. Rom 8:37... overwhelming v is ours 1 Cor 15:54... Death is swallowed up in v.

Col 2:15 ... publicly by his v over them
Rev 5:5 ... David's throne, has won the v.

VINEYARD (n) a plantation of grapevines
1 Kgs 21:1 ... who owned a v in Jezreel
Prov 31:16 ... earnings she plants a v.
Song 1:6 ... for myself--my own v.
Isa 5:1 ... beloved had a v on a rich
1 Cor 9:7 ... farmer plants a v and

VIOLATE, VIOLATED, VIOLATES, VIOLATING (v) to do harm to the person or especially the chastity of; to fail to show proper respect for; to break or disregard

Lev 18:7 ... Do not v your father
Lev 18:8 ... for this would v your father.
Lev 18:10 ... this would v yourself.
Lev 18:14 ... Do not v your uncle,
Lev 18:16 ... this would v your brother.
Lev 20:11 ... If a man v-s his father by
Lev 20:20 ... he has v-d his uncle.
Lev 20:21 ... He has v-d his brother, and Num 15:30 ... who brazenly v the Lord's Deut 22:30 ... for this would v his father.
Deut 27:20 ... for he has v-d his father. Isa 24:5 ... instructions, v-d his laws, Mal 2:10 ... each other, v-ing the covenant of

VIOLENCE (n) exertion of physical force so as to injure or abuse
Gen 6:11 ... and was filled with v.
Ps 12:5 ... I have seen v done to the
Ps 72:14 ... them from oppression and v,
Isa 60:18 ... V will disappear from your
Jon 3:8 ... and stop all their v.
Mic 2:2 ... take it by fraud and v.

VOICE (n) verbal communication by human and divine means
Isa 40:3 ... the v of someone shouting.
Mark 1:3 ... He is a v shouting in the John 10:3 ... sheep recognize his v and John 12:28 ... a v spoke from heaven, Rev 3:20 ..., If you hear my v and open

VOW, VOWS (n) a binding promise or pledge see also COVENANT, PROMISE Num 6:2 ... the special v of a Nazirite, Judg 11:30 ... Jephthah made a v to the Ps 110:4 ... and will not break his v: Matt 5:34 ... do not make any v-s! Heb 7:21 ... and will not break his v:

VOWED (v) to promise solemnly

Eccl 8:2 . . . since you v to God that Mark 7:11 . . . For I have v to give to

## W

WAGE, WAGES (n) payment for labor or services; compensation

Hag 1:6 ... Your w-s disappear as though Zech 11:12 ... give me my w-s, whatever Mal 3:5 ... cheat employees of their w-s, Matt 20:2 ... the normal daily w and Rom 4:4 ... their w-s are not a gift, Rom 6:23 ... For the w-s of sin is death,

WAIT, WAITED, WAITING (v) to look forward expectantly; to stay in place in expectation of

Ps 40:1 ... I w-ed patiently for the LORD
Ps 62:5 ... that I am w quietly before
Ps 69:3 ... w-ing for my God to help me.
Isa 30:18 ... Blessed are those who w for Mic 7:7 ... I w confidently for God to Hab 3:16 ... I will w quietly for the Luke 12:37 ... who are ready and w-ing
Rom 8:19 ... all creation is w-ing eagerly
Rom 8:23 ... We, too, w with eager hope
Heb 9:28 ... are eagerly w-ing for him.

WALK, WALKED, WALKING (v) to roam, traverse, or advance by steps; to pursue a course of action or way of life

Gen 3:8 ... God w-ing about in the garden.
Lev 26:12 ... I will w among you;
Deut 11:22 ... your God by w-ing in his ways

Deut 26:17 . . . promised to w in his ways, Josh 22:5 . . . God, w in all his ways, Ps 23:4 . . . when I w through the Ps 89:15 . . . they will w in the light Prov 4:12 . . . When you w, you won't Prov 6:22 . . . When you w, their counsel Isa 2:3 . . . we will w in his paths.

Isa 40:31 ... They will w and not
Isa 43:2 ... When you w through the
Jer 6:16 ... godly way, and w in it.

Dan 3:25 ... w-ing around in the fire
Amos 3:3 ... two people w together

Mic 6:8 ... to w humbly with your God.
Mal 2:6 ... they w-ed with me, living good
Matt 14:29 ... boat and w-ed on the water
Mark 2:9 ... pick up your mat, and w
John 8:12 ... have to w in darkness,

WANDER, WANDERED, WANDERS (v) to follow a winding course; to stray

Num 32:13 ... them w in the wilderness
Ps 119:10 ... don't let me w from your
Ps 119:67 ... I used to w off until you
Ps 119:176 ... I have w-ed away like a
Matt 18:12 ... one of them w-s away
Eph 4:18 ... they w far from the life
God

1 Tim 6:10 ... have w-ed from the true Jas 5:19 ... someone among you w-s
1 Pet 2:25 ... like sheep who w-ed away.
2 Pet 2:15 ... They have w-ed off the

WAR, WARS (n) armed conflict with an opposing military force; a state of hostility, conflict, or antagonism

Josh 11:23 ... finally had rest from w.
Ps 46:9 ... He causes w-s to end
Ps 68:30 ... nations that delight in w.
Ps 120:7 ... peace, they want w!

Ps 144:1 ... He trains my hands for w
Isa 2:4 ... nor train for w anymore.

2 Cor 10:3 ... we don't wage w as humans
1 Pet 2:11 ... that wage w against your
Rev 12:7 ... Then there was w in heaven.
Rev 19:11 ... and wages a righteous w.

WARN, WARNED, WARNING (v) to give notice to beforehand especially of danger or evil; to counsel

Gen 2:16 ... God w-ed him, "You may freely
Gen 31:24 ... told him, "I'm w-ing you--
Gen 31:29 ... to me last night and w-ed me,
Exod 19:21 ... down and w the people
Num 16:40 ... This would w the Israelites

1 Sam 8:9 ... but solemnly w them about
1 Kgs 2:42 ... LORD and w you not to
2 Kgs 17:13 ... and seers to w both Israel
2 Chr 19:10 ... must w them not to sin
Ezek 3:18 ... If I w the wicked,

Ezek 33:3... the alarm to w the people.
Luke 16:28 ... I want him to w them so
Matt 16:6 ... "Watch out!" Jesus w-ed them.

Acts 4:17 . . . must w them not to speak 1 Cor 4:14 , . . to w you as my beloved

1 Cor 10:11...written down to w us who Col 1:28...w-ing everyone and teaching

1 Thes 4:6...solemnly w-ed you before.

1 Thes 5:14 ... urge you to w those who
2 Thes 3:15 ... but w them as you would
Heb 3:13 ... You must w each other

WARNING, WARNINGS (n) something that warns or serves to warn; the act of warning

Ps 19:11 ... They are a w to your servant, Ps 81:8 ... while I give you stern w-s. Jer 6:8 ... Listen to this w, Jerusalem, Jer 42:19 ... Don't forget this w I have Zeph 3:7 ... they will listen to my w-s. 1 Cor 10:6 ... happened as a w to us, 1 Tim 5:20 ... as a strong w to others. Titus 3:10 ... give a first and second w.

WARRIOR, WARRIORS (n) a man engaged or experienced in warfare Gen 6:4 ... and famous w-s of ancient Exod 15:3 ... LORD is a w; Yahweh Josh 1:14 ... strong w-s, fully armed, 1 Chr 28:3 ... for you are a w and Ps 45:3 ... your sword, O mighty w! Jer 20:11 ... beside me like a great w.

WASH, WASHED (v) to cleanse--of physical, ceremonial, or spiritual significance
Ps 51:7 . . . w me, and I will be whiter John 13:5 . . . he began to w the disciples' John 13:10 . . . does not need to w, except Acts 22:16 . . . Have your sins w-ed away Eph 5:26 . . . holy and clean, w-ed by the Titus 3:5 . . . He w-ed away our sins, Heb 10:22 . . . bodies have been w-ed Jas 4:8 . . . W your hands, you sinners; 2 Pet 2:22 . . . w-ed pig returns to the mud. Rev 7:14 . . . They have w-ed their robes in Rev 2:2:14 . . . those who w their robes.

WASTE, WASTED (v) to spend or use
carelessly or inefficiently
Ps 127:1 ... work of the builders is w-d.
Prov 29:3 ... prostitutes, his wealth is w-d.
Prov 31:3 ... do not w your strength
Luke 15:13 ... there he w-d all his money
John 6:12 ... so that nothing is w-d.
Gal 2:2 ... all my efforts had been w-d

WATCH, WATCHES, WATCHING (v) to diligently wait or keep guard; to observe closely
Judg 18:6 ... the LORD is w-ing over
Job 14:16 ... my steps, instead of w-ing
Job 34:21 ... God w-es how people live;
Ps 1:6 ... For the LORD w-es over the
Ps 17:11 ... and surround me, w-ing for
Ps 61:7 ... faithfulness w over him.
Ps 121:3 ... one who w-es over you will
Prov 2:11 ... Wise choices will w over
Prov 31:27 ... carefully w-es everything
Eccl 11:4 ... If they w every cloud,

Jer 24:6 ... I will w over and care for Jer 31:10 ... gather them and w over Acts 1:9 ... while they were w-ing, and Eph 6:6 ... just when they are w-ing you. Heb 13:17 ... is to w over your souls, 1 Pet 1:12 ... eagerly w-ing these things 1 Pet 3:12 ... eyes of the Lord w over

WATER, WATERS (n) precious resource for drink and irrigation, usually associated with blessing: a body of water
Exod 7:20 ... struck the w of the Nile.
Exod 17:1 ... there was no w there for Num 20:2 ... was no w for the people 2 Sam 23:15 ... good w from the well Ps 42:1 ... streams of w, so I long Prov 25:21 ... give them w to drink.
Song 8:7 ... Many w-s cannot quench Isa 11:9 ... for as the w-s fill the sea, Isa 32:2 ... like streams of w in the Isa 43:2 ... through deep w-s, I will be Isa 49:10 ... lead them beside cool w-s. Jer 17:8 ... reach deep into the w. Jon 2:3 ... The mighty w-s engulfed me; Hab 2:14 ... For as the w-s fill the sea, Zech 14:8 ... life-giving w-s will flow Matt 14:25 ... them, walking on the w. John 3:5 ... born of w and the Spirit. John 4:10 ... would give you living w. John 7:38 ... Rivers of living w will I Jn 5:6 ... his baptism in w and by Rev 7:17 ... springs of life-giving w. Rev 21:6 ... springs of the w of life.

WAY, WAYS (n) characteristic, regular, or habitual manner or mode of being, behaving, or happening; manner or method of doing or happening: a course of action; route
Exod 33:13... let me know your w-s Deut 26:17... to walk in his w-s, and Deut 30:16... by walking in his w-s. Josh 22:5... walk in all his w-s, obey 2 Sam 22:31... God's w is perfect. Ps 77:13... o God, your w-s are holy. Ps 86:11... Teach me your w-s, O LORN, Prov 2:9... find the right w to go. Prov 4:11... teach you wisdom's w-s Ecci 8:6... and a w for everything. Isa 2:3... teach us his w-s, and we will Isa 40:3... Clear the w through the Jer 6:16... old, godly w, and walk in Mic 4:2... teach us his w-s, and we will Mal 3:1... prepare the w before me.
