"First time in Cebu?"

"Yes. You, sir?"

"No. I had the bad luck to be born here."

"Ah," laughed the girl, "we thought you were an American."

"A lot of people do. Can I be of any assistance to you?"

"Thank you. We're just looking for the Ruftan pension house here on this map."

Well, that was no problem. I knew where that particular flop-house was of old. I ushered the Finns down the gang-plank, carried the girl's back-pack with the aplomb of a bygone era, showed obstructions and obstructers aside, and those locals who did not yield to my bulk were demolished by the vernacular eloquence issuing from completely the wrong face. In the RP if I spoke before I pulled a trigger, assuming the necessity, I'd always have the advantage of a moment's surprise. I figured sending strangers in the right direction was the obverse to handing out the haloes to those worthy of ruthless despatch. Negotiating the ancient grid of Spanish streets, past triangular Fort San Pedro, past Magallanes, past Juan Luna, I deposited them at their destination and was off before they could start to worry whether to tip me. Funnily enough, they'd changed the jeepney departure station to Opon while I'd been gone and I spent forty-five minutes finding it.

FR. BOY WAS OCCUPIED IN REPAIRING THE SCHOOL'S WATER-TANK when I paid him my call of duty and pleasure. The tank, a green toughened-polythene ball on its own four-metre tower, resembled nothing so much as a bean from Jack's magic-stalk and Fr. Boy our intrepid eponymous hero. I was steered his way by the janitor. What was remarkable, to me at least, was not that the janitor remembered me, the only six-foot two inches tall black man ever to attend the institution - which he thought was worth a tip - so much as he'd stayed so long in his job. Fr. Boy had his back to me as he stood on the service-ladder at nearly the height of a basketball-net. As I looked at his broad shoulders and the latissimus dorsi swelling under his sando I was reminded of an old Western I'd seen: Fr. Boy as Jesse James, me as the fink who shot him in the back while he was hanging a picture.

"Father," I said softly.

"Rey," he replied, without turning to see who it might be.

I waited.

"I'll be with you momentarily. This sealant needs me more than you do."

"O-o, Father. That's a nasty crack even from here."

"Crack? That's a six by six piece I'm glueing back in. It broke two days ago and there's no replacement tank available until next week."

"Hoy! Let me lend you a hand."

I jumped for a rung of the service-ladder three feet above my head, just under Fr. Boy's sneakers. To my unpleasant surprise I was unable to reach it. There was not so much a lack of strength in my quads as insufficient elasticity in the knee ligaments. I caught half-hold of the rung beneath as I dropped, wrenching my shoulder. Fr. Boy's thumb and forefinger instantly closed round my wrist, steadying me with the same reassurance as when I'd first vaulted a horse at age thirteen.

"A drop of oil on those knees, Rey," he said.

"Make it consecrated oil, Father."

"Just hold the glue-tube, na lang. I'll press the fragment on until it sticks."

We stayed companionably in that position without speaking for a while, me and Fr. Boy riding habal-habal into the sunset like Pancho and Cisco. After he'd got the shard to stick - I was able to read the small-print with my younger eyes and tell him it would take forty-eight hours to cure fully - we went to the refectory for a snack of puto ug sikuwate. I dipped the springy rice-flour and coconut flake bun, which had the consistency of a teenager's tit, into the hot chocolate, sucked it, and was instantly rewarded with a sharp prong of pain in the left molar. I experimented with the other side. No problem. Another piece of ancient Spanish treat gave me an even sharper spike in the left side again. Shit.

"Toothache?" Fr. Boy asked solicitously. "I often think we have the worst teeth in the world here."

"I used to think I had the best, Father. I guess something happened to me while I was away."

"Well, it was a long time, Rey."

"And the wench is dead," I restrained myself from saying.

We spoke about some of my old classmates, nearly all successful in whatever their sphere was, be it humble or elevated (like gunnery-

sergeants, the Jesuits encouraged you to aim low if you weren't quite up to the mark, for achievement was relative). I kept quiet when Fr. Boy confused my class with another one and he mentioned a boy I'd never heard of, who was now an air-con maintenance-mechanic, specialising in the National brand. Good luck to the poor fuck.

At last we got round to the apparently delicate subject of Fr. Paul.

"Has he, uh, been in regular correspondence with you?"

"Twice. But, Jeez, half my mail used to go astray. Sorry about my profanity, Father. I wasn't thinking."

"Did Fr. Paul say anything to which you or your spiritual adviser might take exception?"

"With respect, Father, I thought he was one of my spiritual advisers."

"Paul is sorely in need of guidance himself."

"Where is he now, Father? Did he return to England?"

"No.He's still here."

"Asa man gyud?"

"I'm not sure I should tell you."

"Why on earth not, Father? You don't trust me, ba? I'm no longer the child you knew."

"You don't have to tell me that, Rey. OK. He's at the SC Retreat House up past Talamban."

"Is he going to offer me the Kingdoms of the World?"

"He may well pull them all down and blind you with the dust." Fr. Boy stirred the thick chocolate in the jug and poured me another cup. I drank gingerly in a silence which was not at all uncomfortable. I realised why he had appeared so uninterested in my experiences when he invited me to make a confession just as I announced my departure. Fr. Boy - so bluff and so straightforward, but a Jesuit in essence under the singlet. His face seemed so frank I could not forebear smiling to myself. I was the unwily one but it was me who looked sly.

Yet after all, why not? It was high time I was shriven. Fr. Boy said by way of rebuttal, though the thought had not occurred to me, "Paul cannot hear your confession."

"Very well, Father," I said in all meekness."Here?"

"No. We shall use the box. I believe this to be a rite hedged with formality for very good reasons. We shall not have the dubious benefit of anonymity but I can give you formality."

I bowed my head.

We entered the San Ignatio chapel. I knelt on the other side of the partition from my old mentor, my invigilator of character, if not intellect, and in the same place and in the same position as I had admitted to masturbation and shop-lifting, I attempted to classify my misdemeanors first into order of gravity, then to put them into order of chronology.

"When did you make your last confession?" the good, strong Father asked me in the time-honoured fashion. I told him and we proceeded. It was 11.49 when we went in and 12.37 when we emerged. Fr. Boy was sweating, I was cool. I would be, di ba? It wasn't exactly breaking news to me. I'd been living with it, more I'd been comfortable with it, for years rather than months.

Fr. Boy refused to absolve me. He said he had detected no sign of contrition. "Come back when you're ready." He spoke curtly. His face was set like the Mactan stone-facings on the school-wall. He was, as usual, right. So far from repenting I was thinking of all that I still had left to do - on behalf of the permanently absent and enjoying it the more for being the only one in the know, the other gagged by a vow of silence. I thought of Skipper's surprise, Lazares's shock. I thought I'd go down to Port Isabel, too, and see what ships were in to load grey bird-shit for Ukraine. Pride was the grand theological word. But what I felt was jaunty.

The old steel mirror in the bend outside the school, that we used to joke was a fung shui mirror, was still there. No one ever took care of it but it was burnished good as glass. I caught sight of my reflection. The smile froze on my face. What I had on was the Runt's Smile.

I FOUND FR. PAUL DISCUSSING AZALEAS with Fr. Alarico, the ex-priest from East Timor who ran the retreat. "Father" Alarico now had a Philippine wife, three bonny kids even darker than himself, and a glow of happiness which surrounded everything in his vicinity. Fr. Paul was of course in earshot of Fr. Alarico and therefore in his immediate vicinity but he was not happy. He was laughing but laughter and a smile, I do not need to assure anyone, are not always the concomitants of felicity or friendship. The most accomplished assassins serve death with a smile.

"Castro, dear boy!" he said. He already looked a bit glazed but my arrival left him dizzier. Of course. Fr. Boy hadn't warned him about it.

If I'd arrived in a puff of violet smoke it wouldn't have been that much stranger and possibly less surprising. Fr. Paul's brilliant smile didn't falter as he regarded me for some twenty seconds as he might a colourful and rare butterfly settling on the dense vegetation of the Retreat House garden. I also favoured him with my best smile. Best, but also genuine, while his was a mask. It was one of those rare occasions where I, part-Filipino, part-African, got out-smiled. My own head started to spin. I wondered if I looked as giddy as Fr. Paul.

"Do you know the name of this fruit?" he asked suddenly.

"What fruit?"

"This," he said impatiently, pointing at a tree thirty yards away.

"That?"

"Yes," he said with greater asperity, the benevolence gone. That was good. This was the Fr. Paul I knew.

I looked hard. The tree was tambis, like I'd seen in the Antilles. You saw the roseate or pale-jade fruits in piles on the sidewalks of Cebu. The flesh was crisp, white, tasteless as paper and usually eaten with salt. Funnily enough, I'd never seen the fruits on their tree before but it was a perfectly nondescript, medium-sized tree, maybe somewhat more gnarled than the run. "Yes, Father. Tambis."

It was as if my intervention had never been. "It is," mused Fr. Paul, "botanically speaking, eugenia malaccensis. Known also in the Antilles, to which it was transplanted - like the Pacific breadfruit - as Pomerac. Colloquially called in some parts the Java Apple."

Man, this was like old times. I'd often wondered if Fr. Paul had seemed so knowledgeable simply because I was young and impressionable. Either he was spectacularly erudite - or, on the other hand, I was still tabula nasa, waiting for impress. Most certainly he prepared for our school lessons, came forearmed. The allusions and background references, as carelessly strewn as banana-leaf sweet-meat wrappers at a cockfight, were assiduously collected. And maybe he'd boned up on the Retreat House botany, too.

We strolled towards the hardy upland specimen of eugenia malaccensis. Fr. Paul flicked a dangling tambis fruit with his forefinger in just the same way as he did our painstakingly crafted Christmas tree decorations: poor aids to our intrinsically heathen beliefs that were originally pagan props themselves. A giant two foot tikki flicked its forked tongue at him from the branch where it was waiting for mosquitoes. I fought an urge to giggle when quite

unconsciously Fr. Paul repeated the same mannerism himself. "Well," he said, cocking an ear to a bird's sweet, seductive melody, "You could think yourself in Eden. Or Never Never Land."

I was beginning to think it was more like Alice in Wonderland.

"Have a Java Apple?"

"No, thank you, Father. Uh, Father, you must forgive my apparent gormlessness. This is a moment I have waited for over so many years. I want you to clarify the questionable things I have done..."

"Then don't call me Father," he said stiffly. "You are not my son." When he saw my genuine bafflement and hurt, he unbent and said less harshly, "I am no longer a priest."

"Pather Faul!" This time his smile was genuine and it prompted mine. I think we were amused by the same thing but I didn't check. There are some things in life that are on their surface too trifling to articulate but which you find subsequently have become an important definer of your friends, di ba? And then you think it's a shame you weren't crass enough at the time to ask, for instance, "Why were you laughing?", for your defining moment with your lifelong friend might be nothing more than a private solipsism.

"You're, uh, going to get married?" I faltered, thinking that for most failed priests the vow of celibacy was the hardest cross to bear. Even as I said it, I thought how ridiculous it was to apply this cliche of behaviour to Fr. Paul.

He, too, was amused. "A lot worse than that, Castro. That would be just a detail, wouldn't it? No. I've lost all belief, the whole shooting-match fails to hold any credibility for me these days. Trinity, saints, canon, all of it."

"You don't believe in Our Lord? Jesus, Father Paul."

"Well quite, Castro."

"But how did it happen? How could it happen?"

"Just say I saw the light on the road to Danao."

"Father, this is terrible. It's like an earthquake hit me. I mean, like everything I thought solid came toppling down."

"In that case I'm sorry. I wouldn't like to wish my mental condition on anyone. So foreign parts didn't make an atheist of you?"

"Foreign parts made Frankenstein's Monster, Father. But they strengthened my beliefs."

"I'm glad to hear it, I truly am, but for the last time I'm no longer in loco parentis to you. You may, if you so desire, call me Paul. If your

hierarchical Philippine soul baulks at that, you could try Mr Paul. Failing that, the respectful 'sir' one extends to schoolmaster or adult stranger will be perfectly acceptable."

"Aye, aye, sir."

"I didn't give you a licence to be impertinent, Castro."

"Ah, diay! No, Father. It was a reflex - OK na lang. I'll call you," and I gulped, "Paul lang."

"Good. Now, if I can't prevail upon you to sample this most attractive fruit, would you care for some coffee?"

"Salamat. If we get Filipinos to drink more coffee we can raise the average national IQ."

"I fail to see a connection."

"We will all sleep less on our backs and get more oxygen."

"Saints alive! You remember. I am afraid I may have abused my position as your teacher."

"Never, Fr. Paul! I owe everything I am to you - nearly everything I am, but certainly everything I know. I've put it into practice the best I can, all the principles I learned from you."

"Well, I'm deeply flattered again. Sugar? No? A drop of milk? Good. Now tell me a little of your rich experience in the world."

Fr. Paul kicked off his sandals and put his feet on a stool, exposing the soles to me. I gulped. Then I spilled the beans. I told him pretty well most of it, siguro. Fr. Paul, as I will always think of him, listened without interrupting. I respected him the more for that because I know from my own experience how difficult it is not to make interjections. It takes more discipline to be a listener than it does to be the most accomplished raconteur. My confession to Fr. Boy had been punctuated by his exclamations, requests for amphifications and his highly unprofessional scolding. Doesn't a good psychiatrist let the patient do all the work?

My accounting to Fr. Paul lasted far longer than any tale I had heard on my travels. At length I fell silent. My eyes were fixed on my hands. Life at sea had not been all that kind to them. I stole a glance at Fr. Paul. His expression was, if anything, blander than when I had commenced.

"Hm," he commented.

"Yes?" I asked eagerly. He shook his head, smiling quizzically, an eyebrow raised. Fr. Paul was difficult to shock; more he prided himself on this English imperturbability. "Fr. Boy said I was as mad as I was bad."

"Did he, I wonder, use 'mad' in the English sense of insane or the American one of 'angry'."

"I think the English sense."

"One respects his opinion, conventional as it may be. On the other hand there is a good deal more violence, directed to less constructive ends, in the Odyssey. Have you castrated anyone since your restoration to us?"

"There's a kid in Manila deserves it but, no, I haven't yet."

"Good. Refrain from so doing."

At that moment the telephone rang.

"I'll just retire to the garden, sir."

Fr. Paul waved me down as he picked the receiver up. The telephone system had evidently improved in my more than seven years away. Prior to my departure, fully half the calls I fielded would be wrong numbers and you'd be lucky to get through on the third dial from any of the conveniently placed shop-front phones wrongly marked one peso minimum three minutes instead of maximum three minutes.

"Paul, speaking. Mark, how good to hear your dulcet tones. Yes, he is, as a matter of fact. Have you your barefoot spies out?"

I listened to Fr. Boy's voice on the other end. Unfortunately, while I could readily identify his distinctive draw! I couldn't make out the individual words. Fr. Paul's expression of mild amusement never left him but I don't think I was mistaken in believing Fr. Boy to have got madder since I'd last seen him.

"Frankenstein, Mark," said Fr. Paul evenly, "was the creator-scientist, not the monster, so your rather dramatic analogy is not quite correct. Furthermore, one supposes from his name he was Jewish which neither I nor what you like to term my monster are. Golem was the Jewish monster, of course."

There were more angry but unintelligible words from Fr. Boy at San Ignatio.

"I can see it's no use conversing with you in your present state, Mark," Fr. Paul said. "However, feel free to visit, as Americans say, with me when you so desire." He hung up and beamed at me. "The saint, Castro, moves in the world, not outside it. He is not some ethereal creature but flesh and blood. Rather more blood than flesh, I sometimes fear. Yes, dear boy. The saint sees the world with a clarity the impure would call ruthlessness. Do you see clearly, Castro?"

"I think so, sir," I said cautiously. I had an uneasy feeling Fr. Paul had lost his reason with his vestments.

"Why don't you join Opus Dei or the staff of General Lim?" he suggested. "You were saying, if I interpret you correctly, that ends justified means, particularly if no self-interest was involved. A strong medicine is best for prophylaxis if a stronger is not to be used for cure later." It was difficult to know if he was being serious or sarcastic or, knowing my man, both simultaneously.

"On the other hand," he continued, "to pursue a perhaps specious analogy, side-effects on the general population might mean cure was worse than disease which is in contravention of general medical practice as well as common-sense."

"You've lost me, sir," I said.

"I don't think so, Castro."

We were silent a while. I turned the focus on Fr. Paul. Of course I had known what he was talking about. "But what are your plans?" I inquired. "Surely you don't mean to stay here indefinitely."

"No, I don't. As a matter of fact I shall take the traditional course of those who have failed to find firm footing on land. I shall follow the sea."

"What?" I did my best to imagine Fr. Paul mixing with the likes of Jock or even Robbie.

"Yes, not quite a career before the mast, however. I am taking a position as lecturer on the SS Cicero, a vessel cruising the Eastern Mediterranean. Are you familiar with that part of the world?"

"Really through your classes, Fr. Paul. I was pulling ropes most of the time."

"Only Asia Minor, of course. Nothing to compare with the real intellectual glories but possibly more interesting from the archaeological point of view."

"You were always more a Roman than you were a Catholic, sir. By the way, you won't have escaped us, Father. All the stewards will be Filipinos."

"Bayot to boot, I don't doubt." This was possibly the nearest to a salacious conversation one could come with him.

"But what about you? Is there anything I can do to help, sir?"

"I rather think not. But here's my new card. There's my own Harrogate address on one side and my brother's apartment, they're called Chambers actually, interesting English archaism, near

Piccadilly. You might have trouble with the porter, I fear, but if you do come by, persistence will in the end prevail."

"I'm not sure I'd let myself in."

We both laughed together.

"Well, I won't detain you from your prodigal's round. Is there any way I can be of pecuniary assistance again?"

"Definitely not, Fr. Paul. I'm OK. And thanks for all the help before I didn't know about. I'm grateful, really grateful, but I'm most grateful for your teaching. Money is only money, di ba? But knowledge is the real treasure."

"Then I can consider I have taught you something useful after all."

"No, Father. It was beautiful because it was not useful. I applied it, then maybe it became something ugly in the application."

"You're talking in riddles."

"I think you know the solution to anything I set, sir."

Another silence fell upon us. Fr. Paul was before me now, he whom I had needed so many times during my helter-skelter scrambles up the ladders and down the snakes. Now my head was, of course, as empty as it had been of expedients before the Jocks and Nikitas of the world. Fr. Paul drummed his fingers on the table and followed a gecko's inverted passage across the ceiling. I understood my audience was over.

As I was at the door, he said, "Write."

CABLE HAD COME TO CEBU. Nobody was interested in traveller's tales. You didn't have to move two feet from your set or your more affluent neighbour's to see either a pageant of the world's great cities or its seamier spots.

"Uncivilised peoples," commented Auntie Irish complacently as she switched from Amerindians with wooden discs in their lower lips to her favourite Mexican soap-opera dubbed into Tagalog. (She thought the fair-skinned Mexicans were an upper-class family from Manila). Babelisation was to be had at the press of the channel-shift on the remote control nestling in one's palm: French, Chinese, Spanish, German, Italian, and Thai mingled with the snarl of the trisikads and the tootings of the jeepneys outside.

One afternoon I got two surprises. I liked to keep my finger on the arrow-down button rather than hitting on a specific channel-number. More like the fluidity of the court, man, more like the

scenes of my life flashing before me as I drowned. So I got marmosets on Disney channel, the American President on CNN, a black buck beating on a plump pink guy penned in a corner of a boxing-ring on ESPN - high on comedy, albeit low on the surprise factor, over-niggering once again - a flash flood in Italy reported in staccato Latin American Spanish, BBC World Service doing their best with a fuzzy picture, and then sandwiched between Scooby Doo the Dog on Cartoon Network and the Asian stockmarket round-up, my expectations took a twist. Zip, down the coils of the snake. Prap, back up the rungs of the ladder.

I hadn't imagined it. There was Becky, yessir, Nicola Smith's teeny-bopper Singaporean friend, talking ten to the dozen in front of an alternating twinkling montage of pop-group, napalm bloom, starving children, girls licking strawberry cone (why didn't they just make it dick and have done?), and then back to strumming pop-group. You get the picture. Becky was prating in her perfect American-English and in mid-sentence she went into Mandarin which, to me at least, sounded as 100 per cent as her English, before she switched from birdy North Chinese burr into nasal cheer-leaderese again, followed for good measure by hard-palate Malay. If you shut your eyes it would have been difficult to assign a body to that American voice. Becky was a VJ. Shutting my eyes took my attention off the rapid-fire images, seven hundred a minute, the same as a machine-gun's rate of fire, and forced me to concentrate on what Becky was saying. And here was a wonder. She was addressing me and the millions in the perfection of idiom and pitch and I couldn't understand what the fuck she was talking about. I mean, if you'd asked me to do a Fr. Paul precis one minute after, I'd have been at a loss to remember what she'd said. The gist of it was that there wasn't a gist. She was the vampire in the mirror - no trace.

Next moment she had, indeed, disappeared and I got another kick up memory's butt: Sonika Narayan, the other teeny I'd driven up Malaysia into Thailand. Since I'd last seen her she'd lost twenty pounds of puppy-fat, lasered the moustache already incipient at fifteen, but acquired a diamond nose-stud which was both Indian and the height of teenage cool. She did the Becky mid-sentence trick but with Hindi and English-type English. Man, I was as awe-struck as when I saw Michael Jordan or Magic work a combination of moves. More so, for I'd had the prowess of physical fluency myself

and, while I'd read stuff Becky would never in all her life trouble her little head with, as soon as I opened my mouth I was branded a Flip.

Jeez, I thought, with a warm glow of congratulation, I can claim acquaintance with these starlets. I wonder how much they get, was my next thought. Probably more than a dentist or the first mate of a tanker and certainly more than a Cardinal. You have not lived in vain, Castro, I imagined Fr. Paul telling me. What next? I turned to CNN, wondering if I'd see Slash 'n' Crap, no longer in sequined waistcoats but in the grimy white of the convinced, marching with placards on some embassy or other, but it was only the show-biz hour.

There was no need to leave the discomfort of your own hooch to see the world; the world would come to you at the touch of a button. I tried to impress Auntie Irish with an account of the waxworks in Madame Tussaud's, but "I already see dat," she informed me with icy dignity. Those who lived within the mighty span of the information-bearing cable did not care to be thought hicks. I was reading a book I'd picked up on Fr. Paul's desk which he, with typical generosity where the treasures of the mind were concerned, had pressed upon me. It was a history of human emotions, an encyclopaedia of sensibility. Sense it didn't possess too much of; it was way too idealistic for the humanity I'd seen, but it was an inspirational read. The author spoke of invisible filaments linking kindred spirits across space and time. But what, I thought, of the tendrils linking enemies? Incandescent wire gossamers which could shed eternal light on the perplexities of the moment. I imagined wrapping them around the necks of those so deserving; I imagined myself at the centre of a spider's web, cognisant of the vibration down my threads which would betray the whereabouts of the hostile and the unredeemed.

But for the moment it was a humbler kind of hands-on, while I awaited my party-invitation to the US of A. Cheech Chong dropped me a line. He wanted me to come up to Manila to be his team's physio, maybe also to help out a little with the coaching. Putting people on ice I knew about, so putting ice on people was no big deal. While up there I could give a couple of people the full Halo' treatment, for Haydee and Dant, for Butch.

I e-mailed my acceptance to Cheech at Chong@ slamdunk.speed.ph.com from the cybernet café in the brand-new

mall in Cebu Uptown. What next, man? Would we be employing Bohaidenese maids and stubbing cigarettes out on their cheeks as casually as I punched the keys on the board? Would we be teaching music to Cubans? Accountancy to the Singaporeans? Time-tabling to the Germans? Ethics to Jenny Smith?

I looked at the transfigured young faces at the computer-screens around me. This was tomorrow and I was living in its glow. The off-duty pre-dentistry stude next to me in the Cebu Doctor's College uniform was clicking her way through the menus and the sites the way I would high-step across Butch's tyres in my prime. She didn't, to be objective, look like she'd suffered from anoxic slumbering at any time in her life. I read some indecipherable chat-room shorthand on her screen - RU ^^ wid Ronagirl? - and thought she held in the electronic mouse a priceless crystal and silver-filigree jug into which she was pouring a tooth-rotting soft-drink instead of ambrosia. I wished I'd brought Fr. Paul. I wished he'd open a Ciceronian chat-room, a halo $^{2}$ of classic and contemporary, inanity cloaked in the obscurity of a learned language no longer foolishness but crazed pedantry.

I thought how Dant would have been a jockey of the keyboard, the Lothario of the chat-room. I thought how it had all come too late for me, too: all the precautions I'd had to take with the post, the third parties, the forwarding when I was long gone. I always got the mail months late, the datelines mocking me like they must have Marryat's post-captains. I could have been a phoney e-mail number, getting my letters fresh as they were written whether I was in Bombay one week and Ebbiola the next. Dead letter boxes were no longer holes in trees but swivel-seats in an air-conditioned room perfumed with the scent of percolating coffee. You could be as anonymous or as accessible as you wanted, as devious or as brazen.

I opened an account in the name of Danton Zarcal, Lazarus13@hotmail.com. On a whim I tried the directory for Skipper. He was there. No surprise. The whole Frat and their relatives down to the fifth degree of consanguinity probably were. I clicked him a line from Dant: I vack for you, mans.

I found Brab on Yahoo! the stupid fuck. I clicked him a line from deadchick@daemon.com.ph: this dish tastes best cold. Then I walked into the dusk.

IT IS THE EVENING OF THE DAY, a poetical or at least a songwriter's expression which would offend the Fr. Pauls of this world with its grammatical redundancy. I sit on a bollard in my rubber slippers and shorts, my old team shorts that I haven't worn in more than seven years. I'm free of mosquito bites, the itchy dots that appear to be plaguing everybody else, judging by the scratching of ankles and slapping of ears going on, because I've applied OFF lotion to my appendages and extremities. I'd like to rub that on a few skins. Oh, for Life lotion, that magic potion applied with the thoroughness that failed Achilles to the Huberts and Commander Smiths of this world from birth that preserves them from the indignities, inconveniences, and dangers presented by life's little bloodsuckers, those agents and vectors of lethal diseases, terrible out of all proportion to the tiny sting and itch which is their harbinger.

My team shorts. I think of how much I hate and fear teams: the congregation and the gang, the crew and the tribe.

The sun starts to set over Olango island to the west of my native Mactan, as it must have set the day Magellan got chopped to pieces by Lapu-Lapu's homeboys in the gory froth of the reef shallows. Magellan and my bad-self, finding a quietus after our globe-trottings.

I think of Brabazon and Nikita, of Dr Al-Elvis, of the last Cuban bully cringing on the raft as Michael and I watched him bleed and we got our breath back. I wonder if one day Nikita's face will loom up at my windscreen as I draw up at the pedestrian-crossing and how I will let my foot come off the clutch accidentally on purpose. I hear Dant's voice again. It says, "Never say die, Gorilla. Don't forget who your real friends are," and I want to reply, "It's not my friends I think of most."

Some girls are giggling over my size and blackness over by the pier-legs. I smile at them, kick off my slippers and show them the soles of my feet, a sickly colour paler than their faces.

I think of how I'd like to make a sundae-confection of all the bests I know, the surmounting glace-cherry at the apex of every civilisation. Then I think I might as well go and use eye of newt and tail of toad because too many bests would cancel each other out. Bests, man, are the flip-side of worsts. You don't have the one without the other.

I hear a voice again. It chides me, "Live and let live. You think

too much, Gorilla." And I smile as I answer, "It takes two, Brod, it takes two. And didn't Fr. Paul teach you anything? Stopping thinking is a crime. That's a crime of omission, Brod."

I try to smile my millionth smile but it's frozen stiff on my face. My legs have gone to sleep under me. I can feel the pins and needles coming, bristling on me like I'm a voodoo doll. I check my watch, my Bambi-purloined, my Bambi-bestowed Timex. It's already 23:00. It's my eleventh hour, Brod, but I don't think the US Cavalry will be coming, more like the Horsemen of the Apocalypse.

I stand, I lurch.
