of 'sodomy' is a major historical issue, we were reminded in Britain of the cultural resonances of anal sex during the House of Commons debate on the age of consent in February 1994, notably in a speech by the late Nicholas Fairbairn MP. 50

The distinctiveness of Hocquenghem's theoretical position in 1972 is underlined if we compare the arguments of Le Désir homosexuel to those of that other 1970s' theoretical text of gay liberation, Mario Mieli's Homosexuality and Liberation, first published in Italy in 1977. Like Hocquenghem, Mieli starts from the idea of the polymorphousness of desire. The emergence of gay identity politics in the 1970s is a means to an end, that end being the liberation of Eros and of 'trans-sexualism'. He opposes 'integration' into this society and economy. This positions him against traditional theses on the left, since he argues that desire is part of the base not super-structure:51 the economy (rather than, in Hocquenghem, the prevailing regime of desire and identity) is dependent on sublimation. Sceptical of the psychoanalytic institution, he argues for promiscuity against exclusiveness, the radical potential of schizophrenia,52 and for the fact of 'our bodily being-in-becoming'.53 However, the grid of analysis differs. Whereas Hocquenghem sees anti-homosexual paranoia and Oedipalisation as facts of desire organised and channelled in a certain way, Mieli believes there is something else outside which represses Eros, and that is ideology,54 a concept Deleuze and Guattari, for example, explicitly reject. Mieli's concept of Eros is therefore grounded not only in Freudian theory but in Jung's trans-historical archetypes, and, like Gide in Corydon, from 'nature'. He endearingly informs the reader that there are gay ducks.55 More importantly, science, notably genetics and embryo research, is invoked to emphasise the fundamental hermaphrodism of every human being.

This is the basis of Mieli's far more sustained engagement with 'the feminine': 'one of the greatest disasters that has happened to our species: the refusal by the man to recognise the "woman" in himself, i.e. to recognise his trans-sexuality'.56 Whereas Hocquenghem emphasises undifferentiated desire, Mieli is interested in the concepts of 'humanity' and 'the person', and their radical erotic and ethical amelioration. The valorisation of anal eroticism, and even the concept of the 'trans-sexual', are important not for the flows of desire but for the breakdown of the society's gender system in favour of women: 'homosexual men who get fucked are closer to trans-sexuality, and tend to overcome the polarity between the sexes'.57 Heterosexual men, since part of their Eros is sublimated, impose an alienated auto-eroticism on women, and Mieli argues that it is women and gay men who are capable of and should aspire to full erotic relations. Mieli thus deploys typically modernist notions of authenticity, alienation and reification which enable

him to talk about 'genuine loving desire'. 58 (Needless to say, the death of Pasolini is thus seen in very different terms from Hocquenghem: for Mieli, the murdering hustler conformed to the structures of heterosexual society.)59 If 'love' gets us beyond individualism and solipsism, and has 'the tendency to annihilate the outworn neurotic and ego-istic categories of "subject" and "object"', it is from the point of view of a Hegelian reconciliation at the end of a dialectic of alienation. This vocabulary occurs frequently in Homosexuality and Liberation: the gay and feminist movements are the antithesis of institutionalised normality;60 the liberation of Eros will mean 'releasing our aesthetic and communist potential, our desire for community and for pleasure that has grown latently over the millenia [sic]'.61 (The novel definition of 'communism' is 'the rediscovery of bodies and their fundamental communicative function, their polymorphous potential for love').62 Mieli's opposition to the commercial gay scene, or 'the programme of commercialisation and exploitation of homosexuality on the part of capitalist enterprise', is based not so much on the way it creates new, fixed, docile subjects out of undifferentiated desire, but on the way it actually prevents the emergence or expression of authentic consciousnesses. Mieli is here drawing heavily on Herbert Marcuse's analysis of consumer society, One-Dimensional Man, and the concept of repressive desublimation, in which the alienating reifications of commodified capitalism are distorting the consciousnesses and pleasures to be found in 'permissive', consumer societies. Mieli is at pains, however, to argue that the grounding of his discourse in such vocabulary does not imply an inert humanism, but rather a notion of becoming.63

Mieli's work also throws up some crucial questions regarding desire and history, or desire in history. For example, the account of the treatment of 'homosexuals' in the Roman Empire to be found in Chapter Three, 'Fire and Brimstone, or How Homosexuals Became Gay', implies the persistence across different epochs of a stable category of people defined

by their same-sex desire. Contemporary 'gay' identity is simply the self-conscious political and emancipatory expression of that identity. In a way, this echoes Mieli's confidence in his use of the by implication trans-historical critical categories of 'genuine', 'alienated' (from what essence?) and so on. So while his summary in the chapter is historical, it is not historicist in the sense of examining the different and changing discourses in any given period which might map out questions of sexuality, identity and truth. The path history takes is not, as it were, a straight one. Hocquenghem in Le Désir homosexuel does acknowledge, via Michel Foucault's Histoire de la folie à l'âge classiquel Madness and Civilisation of 1961, that it is societies in history which create

'means for classifying the unclassifiable', 64 be they mental hospitals for the insane, or the category 'homosexual' for persons engaging in same-sex acts. However, although Hocquenghem does assert that 'The establishment of homosexuality as a separate category goes hand in hand with its repression', 65 this is subordinated in that text to the arguments about Oedipalisation and the broad historical structurings of desire mapped out in L'Anti-Oedipe: 'Savages, Barbarians, Civilised Men'.

By the late 1970s however, the profound mutations in 'homosexual' lives and culture occurring in the Western world were prompting more sustained reflections on the relations between desire and historical change. (It is here of course that we must retrospectively problematisise my use so far in this study of the terms 'homosexual', 'gay' and pédé as all representing historically contingent ways of mapping out desire.) The impetus behind these reflections were matched by Michel Foucault's historical and theoretical work on the prison (Surveiller et punir/Discipline and Punish, 1975) and sexuality (Histoire de la sexualité, vol. 1/History of Sexuality, 1976). Foucault's emphasis is on the way in which power as discourse organises our thinking about 'oppression' and identity. This means an abandonment of the 'repressive hypothesis' (exemplified by Mieli), which has argued that there is something 'natural' or at least beyond discourse which the apparatuses of authority and society then distort, damage, or seek to suppress. On the contrary, it is discourse which in a positive sense gives rise to our sexual categories, our understanding of ourselves as sexual beings. Thus, for example, from the role of the Catholic confession onwards, even and especially at the height of the Victorian era, sex is constantly talked about rather than passed over in silence. In the modern era, this results in the crucial change from discourse about acts to discourse about identity. Whereas the principle category for mapping out same-sex desire before the mid-nineteenth century was that of 'sodomy' an act which theoretically anyone could indulge in, and one which could extend to any kind of non-reproductive sex from the 1860s the 'scientific-rational' term 'homosexual' came to refer to a species of person. One result of this was that many interpellated by such a designation appropriated that identity both politically and culturally, hence the homosexual rights movements active particularly in Germany at the turn of the century, the origin of our contemporary 'gay' movements. But this can also be seen as part of a general Enlightenment phenomenon in which social order is achieved not through external coercion but through internalised processes, a self-surveillance the model and metaphor for which is the panopticon in prison architecture, in which every cell and prisoner is visible from a central point. We are always being watched. Foucault,

ultimately more sympathetic to pre-Enlightenment heterogeneities, thus enables us historically to relativise identities and sexualities in a more precise way than the broad description of cultural codings and decodings in L'Anti-Oedipe.

In La Dérive homosexuelle of 1977, Hocquenghem's misgivings about the commercialisation and embourgeoisement of homosexuality are expressed in very Foucauldian terms. Rather than representing a straightforward liberation or desublimation, the changes of the 1970s are seen as part of a redistribution of terms and categories within, rather than beyond, the workings of power. The gay movement can be read as the avant-garde of the new sexual arrangements. For example, 'coming out' in the early 1970s, reminiscent of the role of Catholic confession in earlier times, announces a process through which by the end of the decade the whole society is talking incessantly about sex and its link with truth and personal identity. The expected 'liberalisation' of anti-homosexual legislation will be matched by a tightening of the apparatus elsewhere, as regards children's sexuality, public sex, sexological/medical orthodoxies, and the demise of those heterogeneities of inter-class sex or drag (les folles) which formerly characterised the homosexual subculture. (This is the theoretical context for his opposition to feminist puritanism we looked at in the previous chapter.)

Since the right to 'private life' that is coming is no longer grounded in Nature or God, it will tend to become a huge system of compensations between sub-groups, defined by the risks they run and make others run. Sex will no longer be the great enemy, but a sector to talk about clearly, an anarchy to sort out and impose order upon thanks to the new sexological enlightenment. Homosexuals will have to pay for their new 'recognition' with the sacrifice of their own margins and their own irrationalities. 66

Hocquenghem argues that, similarly, the often ad hoc 'anti-homosexual' legislation in the French penal code was used in an exploratory way, and was eventually used against transvestites. 'Homosexual politics' in the 1970s meant accepting an interpellation and walking into a trap of post-Enlightenment power. The gay movement founded a new normality and Law, even invoking republicanism to criticise the archaisms of the penal code's reference to nature and implications of Christian morality. The rationalisation of the Law is not a straightforward 'progress', but an opportunity for the system to use dissent for its own ends, that of renewal, reformulation, fine-tuning. Society will put up with the homosexual rather than seek to get rid of him, but only by distinguishing between 'good' and 'bad' practices and preventing any disruptions

to the dominant order (Hocquenghem is thinking notably of society's segregation of children).

This focus on history that characterised the late 1970s has its apogee in the book and film of 1979, Race d'Ep! Un Siècle d'images de l'homosexualité ('rasdep' is back-slang for pédéraste). This chronicle of images and identities of homosexuality creates a striking narrative, as when twentieth-century history is read in terms of the emerging homosexual identity and movement flourishing in Europe between 1920 and 1933, only to be destroyed almost simultaneously by Nazism and Stalinism. The setback of this bloody interruption explains the delay until the late 1960s and the young adulthood of the post-war generation before a new movement could emerge. However, Race d'Ep also succeeds in completely deconstructing its subject, for it makes clear that 'homosexuality' and 'the homosexual' are ephemeral categories, provisional solutions to the dilemmas of modernity. While same-sex desire has always existed, homosexual identity has not, so 'gay liberation' is certainly not the culmination of 'a gradual and invincible process founded on the progressive bringing to light of a pre-existing and irrepressible reality'. The most imaginary of all minority modes of being, it is the least rooted in an essence or nature. 67

This is not to say that gay political struggle is not worth waging. Hocquenghem is pointing out, however, that it is never a straight-forward question of more freedom or more repression, that it is always a two-way street, and any gay politics must be vigilant of that if its goal is going to be a wider social liberation rather than simply an accommodation to the normalcy of 'rights'. Moreover, the question of history raises that of historical periodisation on the cusp of the 1970s and 1980s, and the profound social, technological and political change which was rewriting the agendas of French society and the Western world in general. The move to history, accompanied by a disinvestment in traditional political struggle, and, for Hocquenghem, even to an extent post-traditional struggle, went hand in hand for many French thinkers with a move to ethics and aesthetics. Lyotard's La Condition postmoderne/The Postmodern Condition of 1979 corresponds to both operations, in its periodisation and also in its attempt to find resistant ways of dealing with the crisis of truth claims and of the legitimacy of knowledge in a world system in which knowledge had become commodified. Michel Foucault's diagnoses of modernity would lead him in the second and third volumes of Histoire de la sexualité, published in 1984, to explore the alternative mappings of the sexual to be found in the ethical structures of ancient Greece and Rome. Even in the preface to the American edition of L'Anti-Oedipe in 1977, Foucault had stressed the ethical dimension of Deleuze and Guattari's work, an introduction to non-fascist life based on deindividualisation, since

'the individual is the product of power'. 68 (The liberal moralism of Glucksmann and Lévy can be seen as the caricatured version of this return to the ethical.)

Hocquenghem was aware that, as well as revealing diverse pasts, history also allows us to speak of possible futures. In the development of modernity over the past twenty years which some have called post-modernity, what possibilities and what impediments exist for desire? The discourse of Mario Mieli allows a political and historical purchase on the process of commodification:

The logic of money and profit that determines the liberalisation of the so-called 'perversions' is not simply an economic fact; it promotes the submission to capital of the whole of human life.

This demonstrates the very complex task of our revolutionary project, to recognise and express a humanity that transcends capital, without offering ourselves up to be devoured by it. In fact, if this should happen, then capital would simply vomit us up again in its own forms, with a view to making use of us to reproduce a new 'humanity', even more programmable, because already programmed in advance.69

Hocquenghem is haunted, not only by capitalism's all-pervasiveness, but also by the fact that the politics and even the theories that he has espoused have been so appropriated by the system. We saw at the end of the previous chapter the ambiguous relationship between the 'transversal' and capitalism. Even in 1977, when he is proposing a resistant 'plural perversity', he is at pains to point out that 'the free rein given to these thousands of partial drives, atoms, tiny pluggings-in, Brownian movement of productive desire'70 represents not the process of capitalist dehumanisation, but a strategy of getting beyond it. The relationships between modernity, post-modernity, desire and identity, and the strategies for resistance that might be historically possible, are the subject of the next chapter.

## 3 Modernity

The first half of Comment nous appelez-vous déjà? Ces hommes que l'on dit homosexuels, published in 1977, is an essay, 'Vivre à midi'/To Live at Midday', written by the novelist Jean-Louis Bory. Although he refuses both the illusions of 'tolerance' and the aim of integration of homosexuals into the social status quo, he is nonetheless at pains to open a homosexual politics out to the culture of the left from which it has been excluded. The basis of this dialogue is adumbrated in his text, as he seeks to elicit empathy from the implied heterosexual reader through autobiographical representation, and also through analysis and explanation of certain myths about homosexuals. This includes cruising (la drague), which has its joys and aesthetics, but which is also 'justified' by the hostility of the surrounding society, which encourages the 'instability and dispersion' of homosexual acts. In any case, Bory is quick to affirm, many homosexuals have long-term relationships. 1 In a discourse familiar since the 1970s, Bory straightforwardly locates the transformation of the social status of homosexuals in a renewed humanist project, the creation of 'complete man, including sex': 'It is against the mechanisation and robotisation of man that individual fulfilment through (among other means) sexual freedom will be the indispensable formula for happiness.'2 At the same time, his method and procedure in this text reproduce that confidence in the whole person or consciousness rationally engaging in a process of education, enlightenment, bildung. The title, 'Vivre à midi', suggests the desire and right of homosexuals to participate in the light of day, that is not just in the open but also as part of a wider progressive Enlightenment project.

In stark contrast, Hocquenghem's contribution to this volume, a short story entitled Oiseau de la nuit/Nightbird, employs a different mode of address and is a vehicle for quite different reflections on 'progress' and the place within it of 'the homosexual'. The married, middle-class and 'heterosexual' narrator, 'Moi'/Me', at some unspecified point of crisis in his life, encounters late at night in a mixed Paris gay café his interlocutor, 'Lui'/Him'. The latter, half seductively, half to enable a flow of discourse about sexuality and the self, plies him with drink, fills him in on the stories of the various marginals assembled there, and leads him on a sexual promenade

through the Parisian night, culminating in the cruising grounds of the Tuileries gardens and the banks of the Seine. The two part after their chaste but revealing encounter, but a brief coda places them in the downstairs toilets of another café, with Lui making what turns out to be a humiliating pass at Moi without at first realising his identity. Moi makes off for his home in the suburbs.

Night for day, determined and defiant marginality instead of humanist fulfilment. Although the dialogue with Lui is an

the whole process, and his attempt at 'othering' only suggests that the Other, as always, is also within. In fact he gives the game away in the next sentence by describing Lui's life as a 'Faustian pact'. What figure more than Faust has come to represent the situation of modern man, making pacts with his passions and with technology as he turns away from the divine to embrace the good and the bad side of development? 13 Moi thus has his own Faustian pact, or partakes in that of the West in general. However, the ambiguity of Oiseau de la nuit is there: how does Lui and what he represents relate to contemporary society, and to the history of that society, notably the avatar of the nineteenth-century city? Lui seems to acknowledge he and his kind belong to a past time, to an ephemeral phenomenon of modernity: 'Perhaps we are the last witnesses of customs that will have lasted just a century or two, from the first street-lamp or first pissotière to sex education'; 14 'our damned past is worth all normalised futures'. 15 On the other hand, the 'revitalised urban poetry' recognised by Moi at the outset manifests itself in the most unpropitious circumstances, for the café decor is as homogenised and 'inauthentic' as anywhere. Significantly however, this 'new' style of decor, which everyone seemed to condemn when it appeared, is now not only accepted that is, it has become hegemonised, part of the everyday, even a tradition but able to generate aesthetic experiences, and this is not just because of the presence of Lui and his kind. The sexual marginals of Oiseau de la nuit belong to a tradition, but as Lui points out, that tradition had a beginning. What therefore is the relationship between social and historical change and the emergence of, not only identities, but also aesthetic experiences? What identities and aesthetic experiences are available to us in contemporary society, and what is the relationship between our moment and the previous epoch? Is it a question of the 'modern' and the 'post-modern', and when did one begin and the other end? Why is the aesthetic being privileged, and what are the implications of the term?

To answer these questions, it will be necessary to explore Hocquenghem's theoretical writings of the 1980s. First, however, light can be shone on the meaning of modernity and its relationship with the aesthetic, as well as on the 'poetic' traditions invoked by Hocquenghem, by looking at the work of Walter Benjamin and in particular his writings on Baudelaire and Paris, which in fact form the second major intertext of Oiseau de la nuit. Marshall Berman in his penetrating study of modernity reminds us that the latter is always to be understood as a dialectical interrelation between forces of construction and development, and forces of destruction and oppression; between an abundance of possibilities and an emptiness of values; between feelings of merger with and alienation from the modern city. The great modernists of the nineteenth

century and Baudelaire is a prime exemplar 'all attack this environment passionately, and strive to tear it down or explode it from within; yet all find themselves remarkably at home in it, alive to its possibilities, affirmative even in their radical negations, playful and ironic even in their moments of gravest seriousness and depth'. 16 The twentieth century, however, has tended to sunder these two attitudes. The poems and prose poems of Baudelaire, created at the time of the dramatic transformations wrought by Haussmann during the Second Empire, are often vehicles for primal modern scenes. For example, the sonnet 'À une passante' describes the fleeting encounter with a 'fugitive beauty', the crowd of the boulevard yielding up a figure of fascination that it then swallows up again, 'love', as Benjamin puts it, 'not at first sight, but at last sight'. 17 The construction of the boulevards over the old defensive walls created an innovative environment, 'a new private and public world', a way of being 'private in public'. 18 At the same time, of course, these joys and pleasures have their dark side of increased class polarisation and homelessness provoked by the demolitions. Berman argues that, for example, Baudelaire's prose poem 'Perte d'auréole' crystallises a key moment when the poetry of the modern era finds its source not in purity and spirituality, but in the ugly, the degraded, in filth. This is consistent with the tendency of modern culture to desanctification.

Now for that other emerging category of modernity, the 'homosexual', the new urban experience is consistently lived not simply in a dark, hidden side, but in a wholly intensified manner, and it survives longer. The homelessness and deterritorialisation of capitalist society are redoubled, but territories are staked out. For Lui in Oiseau de la nuit, the nocturnal urban landscape is a shifting, mobile, kaleidoscopic 'home': one cannot imagine him anywhere else, not for him the socially segmented world of the twentieth-century suburban highway and the 'home' that Moi is returning to at the end in a mixture of panic and reluctance. Ironically, Moi resanctifies the cruising homosexuals: 'The vaporous globes of the lamps also formed two arcs, symmetrical haloes',19 that 'vaporeux' so redolent of the gaseous lack of fixity of modern life. (However, it should be pointed out that the French 'halo', used here, refers to physical phenomena, while it is

One can see how deeply worrying this would be for Hocquenghem, so concerned to preserve dissent and a freedom of becoming, while at the same time perturbed to see the fruits of his generation's activity producing a caricature of civilised life. His disenchantment with the orthodoxies of contemporary life is radical, and he is not prone to home in on the possibilities for a radicalising of democracy in the personal and social spheres glimpsed by Anthony Giddens in the links between modernity's accelerating abandonment of the frameworks of tradition, the increase in personal autonomy, and the emergence of a plastic sexuality freed from the intrinsic link with reproduction.52 The question remains, however, from what

position can Hocquenghem question contemporary society and offer ways forward? We have seen that the view of the late Frankfurt School, partly articulated in Mario Mieli's text, relies too heavily on notions of an authentic critical consciousness which is repressed and distorted by consumerism, source of a negative aesthetics which awaits its emergence in a communist future. As a consequence, this view faces contemporary life rather undialectically (for example, Mieli writes, 'the stinking metropolis is the negation of sight'), 53 as it relies on a monolithic, non-contradictory concept of ideology holding the social order in place. Its emphasis is on the totality of conditions, and not local particularities. As far as theories of 'postmodernism' are concerned, while their emphasis on the undermining of binary oppositions structured by hierarchy and power, for example between high and low culture, or in discourses of race and gender, may productively set free all sorts of local pluralities and pleasures, they often lack a critical negativity and fall into complicity with the given fluidities of consumer capitalism, the danger that haunts Hocquenghem in the 1980s. In addition, of course, they may fail to perceive the coexistence of 'modern' and 'post-modern' cultural forms in a society or even an individual's habitus, since the proclamation of the 'post-modern' may paradoxically participate in a master narrative of 'before' and 'after'.

The construction of a critical negativity is of course dependent on a positivity, and while Hocquenghem might eschew the Hegelian certainties of consciousness embedded in Frankfurt School theory, his earlier emphasis on desire and the molecular may come to his aid. Co-written with René Schérer, L'Ame atomique ('The Atomic Soul' a pun on 'arme' or 'weapon'), published in 1986, is the philosophical counterpart of that year's Lettre ouverte. As we shall see, it daringly overturns a 'bad side' of capitalist modernity, namely the atomisation of social life that is often critiqued,54 and wittily offers a riposte to the totalising nuclear orthodoxies of the French national state. Its subtitle is 'for an aesthetics of the nuclear age', and it is worth reflecting on what is at stake in the term. In what way is 'aesthetics' central to the problems of (post)modernity?

As Terry Eagleton argues, the philosophical preoccupation with the aesthetic since the Enlightenment is 'inseparable from the construction of the dominant ideological forms of modern class society, and indeed from a whole new form of human subjectivity appropriate to that social order'.55 Contradictory, it combines notions of sensuous particularity (its etymology connects with the verb 'to feel') with abstract formulation. With the advent of capitalist society and the reign of the commodity, the work of art or artefact becomes separate and autonomous, mirroring the bourgeois ideological myth that we as human subjects exist for ourselves and owe nothing to anyone, but also positing a realm of freedom in which human

powers may surpass market utility. The now free-floating category of the aesthetic is a way of replacing the coercion of absolutism, of marrying the general and the particular, and of balancing individual antagonism and indeed atomisation in the social and economic spheres with the inner binding coherence of the subject's appetites, inclinations and affections. 56 This process is one of both oppression and of utopianism. Its history since 1750 offers various mutations. In the late nineteenth century and the increasing reification of capitalist society, the aesthetic of modernism, announced in Baudelaire and articulated by Benjamin for example, emphasises the autonomy of art, its role as negation, as 'the guerrilla tactics of secret subversion, of silent resistance, of stubborn refusal'.57 Post-war consumer capitalism, however, sees a wholesale aestheticisation of society as culture becomes increasingly commodified.

The diagnosis of contemporary society to be found in L'Ame atomique has its roots in the critique of the instrumental rationalism of modernity, and its political and institutional failures. Concurring with Adorno that the post-Auschwitz

here seem to be back in the territory of L'Anti-Oedipe: 'the soul . . . is not the transition towards the apprenticeship of personal identity', 67 but a Body without Organs. However, this potentiality cannot be limited to desire alone: 'Those who limit themselves by speaking the language of desire still remain on the threshold of the soul, which is unlimited.'68 Connections are always there, for the 'subject' inhabits and is inhabited by a continuum of space, time and substance: 'an animated, active, erotic, aesthetic, passionate spatiality' which 'also includes time, the memory-image'.69 Making use of the airy connotations of the wide-open circumflexed vowel in the French âme, Hocquenghem and Schérer thus emphasise processes of dilation, expansion, dispersion, dressing the Kantian idea of the incommensurate with the scientific and science fiction vocabulary of the aesthetic as the 'things from another world'.70 Meanwhile, they insist on the critical value of the aesthetic in terms of, especially, Fourier and Baudelaire (via Benjamin) rather than Adorno:m

when Baudelaire himself invents and names the aesthetic category of 'modernity', it is in order to bring into the field of the artist everything which seemed excluded from it, to enrich art with what around him is becoming, as much as to reveal, after the ultra-modern Fourier, the backwards march and the deception of progress.71

Rather than reproduce the architecture of L'Ame atomique which structures the argument around four 'aesthetic categories' (Souls, Visions, Allegories and the Sublime) interrupted by playful and speculative interludes, my procedure here is to follow at a sometimes more atomic level a number of concepts that can be tracked through the work's argument, and then to re-alight on the contrasting aesthetic landmarks in modernity that are Fourier and Kant. The first is that of constellation. Invoked for example to describe the heterogeneous aesthetic categories examined by Hocquenghem and Schérer,72 it derives from Rilke and Benjamin and is important for its rejection of teleological history based on linear causality. Objects are to be understood not via a governing central idea, but via a disarticulation into disparate elements viewed from a myriad of angles, a procedure which thus permits the cultivation of discontinuities in the forward march of modernity and rational progress. The process of diffraction, as for example in the surprises of the modern city, is that of the deviation of light, of the detail that suggests passions and particularities, of beauty in the midst of degradation. In the domain of historical transformation, the notion of progress is diffracted by that of catastrophe and vice versa, and thus the pos-

sibility of the new and even salvation, a Messianic view of what can be blasted out of history that again owes much to Benjamin:

The historical theory of catastrophe, between origin and destruction, ruin and affirmation, snatches from the past its unfulfilled promises. If, looking closer, the continuity of progress is but the mythical diffraction of a succession of catastrophes, then history, at any moment, can take another course, a turn of salvation. 73

Détournement is a strategic version of this, whether in a child's questioning of instrumentality, or in the parcours and gaze of the man in the crowd or flâneur (as in Baudelaire, equated by Hocquenghem and Schérer): 'cruising and flânerie take hold of the very things which, in the urban decor, ought to incite to work, science and patriotism'.74 Détournement is of course also a situationist concept, as when for example Vaneigem argues for a turning round, a reclamation of lost meaning that puts the stasis of the spectacle in motion.75 However, Hocquenghem and Schérer argue that the notion of the aura contradicts the situationist notion (as in Guy Debord's Society of the Spectacle) that we are in alienation, in thrall to the spectacular, to the falsity of contemporary images. The Benjaminian aura can be found anywhere, it appears and disappears in its fragmentary, chaotic, allegorical and inexplicable way, a new magic or phantasmagoria rather than a source of nostalgia or political protest. It indicates

the other aspect of this society of shocks, of uniformisation, of masses. Each person [or thing] hides the most romantic [romanesque, romantic, novel-like] of intimacies, has a double face for those who can glimpse it, but only in a flash, in that instant of illumination in which the shadow of a doubt strikes us about the shadow we have just passed.76

In terms familiar from Co-ire, the child is the incomplete and even non-anthropomorphic, a privileged vehicle for the passions and play of the atomic soul. The child's relationship with machines and dolls, its naivety and undermining of the serious, all point to an intermediary zone between subject and object. Notably, we are all child-like when faced with colours (evacuated by and large from modern male dress). Colour is both abstract and sensual, the possibility of escape, beyond messages and signification, its perception as source of light is a clue to the juxtapositions of elements that make

up the world. The notion of correspondances as in Baudelaire's famous poem of the same name, in which different sense impressions, smell and touch, for example, refer to each other, a process known as synaesthesia is relevant for Kandinsky's attitude to colour but also to allegory in the Benjaminian sense. Whereas the received notion of allegory, of one-to-one equivalences and of the personi-

fication of abstract categories, is discredited in the Romantic and post-Romantic tradition of Goethe, Hegel and Lukács, 77 Hocquenghem and Schérer turn the negative of its anti-individualism into a positive, linking it to their anti-anthropomorphism and even to the aesthetic promise held out by the overcoming of the binary between living and non-living matter. Moreover, they locate allegory, and the putting-into-allegory (allégorèse or allegoresis, as 'seme' 'meaning' is to 'semiosis', the production of meaning) in precisely those historical moments when belief in direct communication with a truth or god (the domain of the, for them, anathematised 'myth') has broken down: 'Its internal tension is that of an irreducible contradiction between the loss of the sacred as stable signification, and a universal charge of undefined signification, fluttering above everything.'78 The overcoming of the distinction between reality and fantasy, the element of mystery and enigma, which is ultimately linked to the play of attraction linking the desiring body and the particles of the atomic soul, can be detected in the dissident allegorising of the cruising homosexual in the modern city, but also as a discontinuous, alternative tradition in the master narrative of the West, in those negative theologies and syncretisms such as the first-century Gnostic Christian heresy, with its notion of an unknowable and hidden God beyond the devalued world created by that vindictive demiurge, the Jehovah of the Old Testament.

The centrality of the baroque in the aesthetic of L'Ame atomique is thus due to its endlessly proliferating meaning, its contradiction of classical order and measure, its cosmopolitanism and its syncretic mingling of figures from Christianity and paganism at a time when the unity of belief and meaning was under threat. The dispersed, dynamic and multipolar world of the baroque is an aesthetic of becoming, it lays bare the vitality which underpins both history and nature: nature is made strange and monstrous, history loses its security of belief. This aesthetic is crucial to the possibilities of vision that modernity in fact contains behind and beyond its objectivising and perspectivising gaze. Hocquenghem and Schérer's critique of modern vision can usefully be compared with that of 1970s' and 1980s' Screen theory in Britain. Stephen Heath, for example, argues that the quattrocento perspective, implying a single point of view and the isomorphism of space, coincided with the construction of a new form of subjectivity, one which we would recognise as bourgeois and which is the ancestor of the procedures of classical Hollywood cinema.79 Hocquenghem and Schérer argue that the modern gaze has its secret, alternative visionary tradition, for that 'single point of view' is in fact multiple, given the number of 'points of view' which now exist in the world, but it is also a relation of attraction and passion. Sight is now a question of knowledge, but knowing

depends on seeing. The 'will to know' is also 'the desire to see everything'. 80 The unified bourgeois subject is a myth constructed out of a world of atoms in which no space is empty, and within which living beings are simply the structurally stable singularities: 'Modernity was constituted in, and constructed, the continuum of space; it simultaneously dominated it and lost itself there. But we shall go further: space can threaten the living with this loss only because it is itself living.'81 So, rather than a stable subject position being created out of a process of suture in relation to the moving image, Hocquenghem and Schérer prefer Deleuze's account of the cinema in which that process is dominated and replaced by a process of 'vaporisation of the real', of appearances and disappearances: 'The eye is in things.'82

The nearest L'Ame atomique gets to a theory of ethics is in the section on melancholy, seen as that excess, that impossible aspiration to the divine and the infinite faced with the rationalisations of the modern era. However, Hocquenghem and Schérer insist that this is an aesthetic, not a political category, one which calls into question that binary opposition in the context of our helplessness faced with a (now) inaccessible history. The concepts of the incommensurate and of the sublime are crucial to this discussion, and obviously lead us to an examination of the uses Hocquenghem and Schérer make of Kant.

The Kantian system relies on a duality. We move in two simultaneous but incompatible worlds, those of noumena and phenomena. The former are those things knowable to thought alone, and therefore unknowable, because it is only the

latter, the world of appearances, of objects of possible experience, which is fortuitously accessible to, and corresponds with, our conceptual and intuitive or sense categories. Pure reason always aspires to know the unconditioned, to know the world outside and beyond individual perspective. Practical reason deals not with truths but with duty, in the moral law that reason provides through the categorical imperative, and in the exercise of freedom. It can thus be argued that the Kantian subject is split: we are both noumenal subjects of a transcendental freedom that grounds universal value, and phenomenal objects in nature that are determined facts (although the object-in-itself, beyond our categories, is always unknowable). The account of the aesthetic to be found in the Critique of Judgement of 1790 offers a mediation between pure and practical reason, noumen and phenomenon. Through the workings of imagination rather than theory, the aesthetic involves both a sensory experience and a claim to universality through the construction of a community of free, feeling subjects. In this abstraction of our interests and desires, the aesthetic object is perceived as an end in itself, purposiveness without purpose, but also in a striving beyond the limits of our point

of view and a glimpsing of the possibility of a non-alienated object. The sublime, that glimpse of the infinite in the work of art or nature, interacts dialectically with the beautiful, that realisation of our correspondence to reality, a process that thus involves both comprehension and incomprehensibility, the sensory and the suprasensory, our fittedness to the world but also our limitations.

At the dawn of modernity, then (Kant was writing against absolutism in a not fully developed bourgeois society), we find delineated and theoretically encapsulated a 'solution' to the subject/object dilemma, one which validates both the sovereignty of the individual subject and the reality of the objective world. This is crucial to the political and property systems of modernity, but it is a precarious solution. It has its (liberal) utopian element in the celebration of freedom and the ideal of a community of rational subjects, but is riven with the contradictions of the emerging middle-class society. We are both free and unfree, sovereign subjects of liberty and objects governed by necessity in the anonymous play of economic forces. In a post-feudal world in which 'what to do?' cannot be deduced from your social position, ethics thus has to become self-referential, and the aesthetic is in turn modelled on this, reconciling pure thought with concrete sense experience, a global decree with material particularity.

For Hocquenghem and Schérer in L'Ame atomique, Kant is read and adjusted for his utopian potential, and then set up to be surpassed by another figure of his epoch. The Kantian dialectic of the sublime and the beautiful is about both propping up and humbling the subject, and for a Marxist critic like Eagleton this is part of its ideological effect, its naturalising of social norms as it brings us out of ourselves and puts us back, renewed and refreshed, into the world. However, Hocquenghem and Schérer alight upon that aspect of the sublime which is 'a kind of unconscious process of infinite desire, which like the Freudian unconscious continually risks swamping and overloading the pitiable ego with an excess of affects'. 83 While they approve his break from the notion that the rules of classical form are what constitutes the beautiful, as well as the 'negative theology' involved in the incommensurate and the unrepresentable, their own interpretation of the sublime emphasises its dynamic and transformative power: a 'movement' which ensures 'the transformation of an inert world into a universe of latent forces'.84 Noting one of its etymologies in the distillations of medieval alchemy, they proclaim its sensuality: 'The sublime spiritualises, but only in so much as it elevates and concentrates the sensual to a higher power . . . It transforms, it refines or purifies by going from ascension to concentration. It reinforces the erotic instead of renouncing it.'85 Kant stops short of the baroque, with its refusal of conciliation in nature. Hocquenghem and Schérer con-

centrate on the subject-shattering or decentring aspect of the sublime, that floating between being and nothingness which constitutes its threshold, and argue that Kant in the end domesticates and tames it. What interests them is the way in which a resistance to modernity, and in particular its hegemonic rational-scientific domination of nature, is adumbrated in Kantian theory even as it constitutes it.

The glimpses of utopianism in Kant's aesthetic are also there in his 1795 essay, Perpetual Peace, written in the midst of European war. Its argument is basically for a world federation of republican nation-states trading with each other. It translates into the political field some major aspects of Kant's philosophy, notably that Enlightenment belief in
