girls' would be challenged by their friends, whom they saw as having high standards of sexual conduct which they themselves shared. As Annabelle said: 'My friends just don't think I'm like that.' Similarly, Nancy commented: 'I wouldn't like to admit it - that - that after all I'd said - I've gone the same way really.'

It was because they shared their friends' attitudes to premarital sex that they felt that they could not tell them. Rather than defending their own previous behaviour, they disawowed it to themselves and by seeking abortion felt able to hide it from those who they thought would condemn them. As with not telling parents, not telling friends and obtaining an abortion were related. For these women, pregnancy was a moral as well as a practical trouble, and they applied to themselves what they took to be the public typification of single pregnant women. As Goffman has suggested:

The stigmatised individual tends to hold the same beliefs about identity that we do; this is a pivotal fact . . . Shame becomes a central possibility, arising from the individual's perception of one of his own attributes as being a defiling thing to possess and one he can readily see himself as not possessing. (1968b: 17, 18).

For those seeing premarital pregnancy as a stigmatising condition, abortion is a means of ridding oneself of such a condition and thereby returning to normal. This is of course not the sole reason why these women sought abortion: but their view of premarital pregnancy as shameful informed and coloured those decisions
