Appendix 2.1 Financial inclusion indicators and data sources

<table><tr><td>Indicators</td><td>Sources</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Usage dimension</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults who report having an account (by themselves or with someone else) with a formal financial institution or a mobile money provider</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults using a transaction account (with a bank or other formal financial institution or mobile money provider) to make or receive digital financial payment</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>deposit accounts per 1,000 adults</td><td>IMF Financial Access Surveys</td></tr><tr><td>E-money accounts per 1,000 adults</td><td>WB Global Payments Systems Survey</td></tr><tr><td>Retail cashless transactions per 1,000 adults</td><td>WB Global Payments Systems Survey</td></tr><tr><td>Outstanding loans per 1,000 adults</td><td>IMF Financial Access Surveys</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults who receive wages or government transfers into an account (with a bank or other formal financial institution or mobile money provider)</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults using a debit card to directly make a payment from an account (with a bank or other formal financial institution)</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Payment using a mobile phone (from an account)</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Payments using the Internet</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults with at least one loan outstanding from a bank or other formal financial institution</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults that saved at a bank or other formal financial institution in the past year</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Number of mobile money transactions per 100,000 adults</td><td>IMF Financial Access Surveys</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Access dimension</td></tr><tr><td>Number of branches per 100,000 adults</td><td>IMF Financial Access Surveys</td></tr><tr><td>Number of ATMs per 100,000 adults</td><td>IMF Financial Access Surveys</td></tr><tr><td>Number of POS terminals per 100,000 adults</td><td>WB Global Payments Systems Survey</td></tr><tr><td>Number of mobile agent outlets per 100,000 adults</td><td>IMF Financial Access Surveys</td></tr><tr><td>Number of debit cards per 1,000 adults</td><td>WB Global Payments Systems Survey</td></tr><tr><td>Percentage of adults with access to a mobile phone or device or the Internet in the home</td><td>Gallup World Poll</td></tr><tr><td>Agents of payment service providers per 100,000 adults</td><td>WB Global Payments Systems Survey</td></tr></table>

Appendix 2.1 Cont.

<table><tr><td>Indicators</td><td>Sources</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Quality dimension</td></tr><tr><td>Financial knowledge score</td><td>WB Financial Capability Surveys and OECD National Financial Literacy and Inclusion Surveys</td></tr><tr><td>Use of savings for emergency funding</td><td>WB Global Findex</td></tr><tr><td>Distance to frontier</td><td>WBG Doing Business</td></tr></table>

Source: Authors' own calculation.  
IMF = International Monetary Fund; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; WB = World Bank; WBG = World Bank Group

Appendix 2.2 List of countries considered for financial inclusion rankings (in alphabetical order)

<table><tr><td>Bangladesh</td><td>Mongolia</td></tr><tr><td>Brunei</td><td>Myanmar</td></tr><tr><td>Cambodia</td><td>Nepal</td></tr><tr><td>China</td><td>Pakistan</td></tr><tr><td>Hong Kong</td><td>Philippines</td></tr><tr><td>India</td><td>Korea, Rep. of</td></tr><tr><td>Indonesia</td><td>Singapore</td></tr><tr><td>Japan</td><td>Sri Lanka</td></tr><tr><td>Lao PDR</td><td>Taiwan</td></tr><tr><td>Macau</td><td>Thailand</td></tr><tr><td>Malaysia</td><td>Vietnam</td></tr></table>

# 3 The effects of financial inclusion on development outcomes

New insights from ASEAN and East Asian countries

Rajabrata Banerjee, $^{1}$ Ronald Donato, and Admasu Afsaw Maruta

## 3.1 Introduction

Over the past decade, financial inclusion has received increasing attention amongst researchers and policymakers, and a growing body of empirical literature is emerging highlighting the potential benefits of increasing financial inclusion in developing countries (Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2018; IEG, 2015; Allen et al., 2012). The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) proposed by the United Nations refer to financial inclusion as a mechanism for supporting inclusive economic growth (Jahan et al., 2019). In essence, financial inclusion is generally viewed as the extent of the population which has access to and use for formal financial services. In this context, research and policy attention have focused on those people who are socially excluded from the financial system and how strategies can be devised to enable the 'unbanked' segments of the population to enhance their engagement with the financial system. Expanding financial inclusion has the potential to benefit the poor through various channels, including the ability to accumulate savings and access credit that enable them to smoothen consumption patterns, better manage financial risk to deal with uncertainties, and invest in productive assets (Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2018; IEG, 2015).

The study reported here considers a comprehensive data set on financial inclusion and development outcomes from 20 Asian countries over the period 2004-2015. This chapter builds on the previous chapter and contributes to the research enquiry on financial inclusion by filling several important research gaps in the literature. Specifically, they are (i) extending the array of development outcomes being analysed, (ii) using both aggregated and disaggregated measures of financial inclusion when determining its impact on development outcomes, (iii) giving greater attention to the role of political risk factors and its interaction effect when examining the impact of financial inclusion on development outcomes, and (iv) determining the broader policy implications that come with such closer examination. We briefly elaborate on these contributions in the pages that follow.

First, much of the empirical literature exploring the potential benefits of financial inclusion on development outcomes has focused on economic growth,

poverty, and income inequality where research findings generally reveal the positive effects of financial inclusion on these outcomes (e.g., see Chapter 2). However, there is a dearth of empirical literature examining the effect of financial inclusion on other important development outcomes listed under SDGs and forming part of overall human development - specifically, health and education outcomes. This is surprising given the already-established positive nexus in the empirical literature between financial development and human capital and its impact on education and health outcomes. Accordingly, a key focus of this chapter is to extend the range of development outcomes under analysis by examining the impact of financial inclusion on economic growth, education, health, and income inequality. The aim is to offer greater insight and understanding into the extent to which financial inclusion impacts on particular development outcomes relative to others. This is particularly important from a policy perspective as the effect of financial inclusion on certain economic development outcomes may be stronger than others (e.g., health vs education vs poverty, etc.), which may vary across regions based on their demographic and institutional characteristics.

The second contribution of this chapter is that both aggregated and disaggregated measures of financial inclusion are incorporated into the analysis to discern a more nuanced understanding of how financial inclusion at a broader level and on an individual level impacts on development outcomes. Thus far, all empirical research on financial inclusion have either adopted an aggregate measure of financial inclusion by way of developing composite index measures (e.g., see Sarma, 2008; Park and Mercado, 2015, 2018) to analyse its impact, or studies have selected specific financial indicators (e.g., number of bank branches, number of automatic teller machines, deposit accounts), drawn from either an access or a usage component of the financial system, as a proxy measure of financial inclusion (e.g., Neaime and Gaysett, 2018; Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper, 2012; Honohan, 2008). It is generally understood both in the construction of a composite financial index measure and in utilising individual indicators that financial inclusion, as noted in Chapter 2, is generally referred to as comprising three major dimensions or components - namely, usage, access, and quality (see Jahan et al., 2019). To date, the empirical literature has given very limited attention to the nexus between these three levels of aggregation, that is, composite index measure, dimensions, and indicators. Accordingly, and in contrast to other studies, this study uses both an aggregated and a disaggregated approach to measure and analyse financial inclusion. Specifically, we first consider financial inclusion at an aggregate level by using a hybrid methodology to establish a financial inclusion index (reported in Chapter 2) and to empirically examine its relationship with development outcomes. We then disaggregate the index into three dimensions of financial inclusions, specifically access, usage, and quality, to examine whether specific dimensions are more strongly associated with particular development outcomes than others. Finally, we disaggregate further to the individual indicator level of financial inclusion and examine the effect of the top two most influential indicators from each dimension, based on principal component analysis scores reported in the previous chapter, on the various development

outcomes to see whether the impact of financial inclusion is sensitive to specific indicators. It is important to note here that we do not claim to establish all possible channels through which these indicators influence economic development, which would require a more rigorous empirical investigation at the country level and beyond the scope of this study. However, we show that the effect of financial inclusion is sensitive to the type of indicator chosen.

Related to this, as a third contribution, this study refers to the growing body of literature on institutional quality and examines how political factors mediate the effect of financial inclusion on economic growth, education, health, and income inequality. The importance of institutional quality for economic development is well established in the literature (see, e.g., Rodrik et al. 2004; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Gupta et al., 2001; Justino et al., 2013; Akresh et al., 2012). Also, a growing body of literature argues that if a country has lower political risk factors, the effect of financial inclusion is more immediate, such as ownership and usage of bank accounts and financial literacy (Allen et al., 2016; Grohmann et al., 2018). However, very little attention has been paid to how political factors moderate the effect of financial inclusion on various economic development outcomes.

The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows: Section 3.2 provides a brief overview of the literature on development outcomes. Section 3.3 describes the data, whilst Section 3.4 outlines the empirical methodology used in the analysis. Section 3.5 reports on the empirical findings and Section 3.6 concludes with discussion and policy implications.

## 3.2 Overview of the literature on development outcomes

The effect of financial inclusion on economic growth relates closely to the widely accepted evidence of the significant positive effect of financial development on long-run economic growth through the channel of more efficient use of capital stock (Goldsmith, 1969), and greater savings and thus higher volume of investment (McKinnon, 2010; Shaw, 1973). Financial inclusion itself connects people with banks; thus, access to a well-functioning financial system enables economically and socially excluded people to integrate better into the economy and actively contribute to its development. Financial inclusion plays a key role in building a strong foundation of a country's financial infrastructure and more effectively and extensively facilitates a more efficient flow of funds channelling savings to investment activities, thus promoting economic growth (Sharma, 2016). Several studies found empirical support to financial inclusion on economic growth. For example, Andrianaivo and Kpodar (2011) and Inoue and Hamouri (2016) showed the positive effects of financial inclusion on economic growth in African countries. Kim et al. (2018) demonstrated the same amongst countries of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and Rasheed et al. (2016) and Demirgüç-Kunt and Kappler (2012) for a large sample of developing countries. Sarma (2008) reported similar findings for financial inclusion in India.

Several studies also demonstrated empirically how financial inclusion contributes significantly to reducing income inequality and poverty. As noted,

expanding financial inclusion to those previously excluded from the financial system enhances the ability to access credit and accumulate savings, thus enabling individuals and households to smoothen consumption patterns, better manage financial risk to deal with uncertainties, and invest in productive assets (Demirgüç-Kunt et al., 2018; IEG, 2015). Agyemang-Badu et al. (2018) found that financial inclusion is inversely related to both poverty and income inequality in a study of African countries, whilst Park and Mercado (2015, 2018) demonstrated similar findings in developing Asian countries. Further, Neaime and Gayset (2018) found that financial inclusion decreases income inequality in Middle Eastern and North African countries, and Honohan (2008) reported that financial access significantly reduced income inequality for 160 countries. Also, country-level studies showed that financial inclusion significantly reduces income inequality and poverty. For example, Huang and Zhang (2020), using Chinese provincial data, showed a gap reduction between urban and rural income. Burgess and Pande (2005) demonstrated the effects of state-led credit and savings facilities expansion on poverty reduction in India. Brune et al. (2011) and Allen et al. (2013) showed that greater access to savings/financial accounts can improve the well-being of poor households in Malawi and Kenya, respectively.

As highlighted before, there is very limited empirical literature exploring the nexus between financial inclusion and other development outcomes, specifically health and education. This is surprising given the already-established positive nexus in the empirical literature between financial development and human capital and its impact on education and health outcomes, and the high positive correlation between financial development with financial inclusion (Mor and Ananth, 2014; Ang, 2008; Mishkin, 2007). Dwyfor Evans et al. (2002) found evidence of complementarity between financial development and human capital. Cheston and Kuhn (2002) argued that financial inclusion offers the opportunity to potentially help women overcome exploitation, create confidence for economic reliance, and help carry out income-generating activities and thus invest more in children's schooling, nutrition, and health. Financial inclusion can ostensibly play an important role in expanding access of low-income households to education finance and lower barriers to accessing education. Similarly, financial inclusion can make important contributions to health outcomes, such as reduced child and infant mortality rates. This is through providing credit, savings, and insurance and thus assisting the financing of healthcare by smoothing income and consumption in the face of health shocks. Further, both education and health outcomes can be mediated through the higher wealth effects stemming from higher returns on savings and investment balances due to lower costs of accessing financial services through formal channels and the higher economic growth fostered by financial inclusion through the enhanced use of capital stock (Hakeem, 2010; Pritchett and Summers, 1996). $^{2}$

As noted, much of the empirical literature on the impact of financial inclusion on development outcomes has focused mostly on economic growth and the related development outcomes of poverty and income inequality. Little to no attention has been given to other development outcomes that focus on social

well-being. Accordingly, this study fills an important research gap by extending the range of development outcomes under investigation to encompass the effects of financial inclusion not only on economic growth and income inequality but also on education and health outcomes.

## 3.3 Data

This section overviews the development outcomes, the key independent variables, and other control variables used in each model. A summary of the description and the data sources of the outcome variables and all independent variables are presented in Appendix 3.1.

## 3.3.1 Development outcomes

In this study, we consider four development outcomes: economic growth, education, health, and income inequality. Following the standard literature, economic growth is measured by the annual percentage change in the real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in SUS purchasing power parity (PPP). Education outcome is measured by expected years of schooling. Several studies have argued that expected years of schooling is a better measure of educational attainment of children than other education indicators, such as literacy rates and enrolment rates (see Behrman and Deolalikar, 1991; Gylfason, 2001; Gakidou et al., 2010). As per the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), $^{a}$ expected years of schooling show the number of years of schooling that a school-aged child can expect to experience if prevailing patterns of age-specific enrolment rates remain throughout the child's life. Higher financial inclusion is expected to generate higher expected years of schooling through credit, savings, and insurance.

Similarly, health outcome is proxied by child mortality rates (Gakidou et al., 2010). Child mortality rate shows the death rate of children under the age of 5. Since financial constraints are more prevalent in less-developed countries, better financial inclusion is expected to have a positive effect on maternal health through credit and insurance, thereby reducing child mortality rates. Finally, following the standard literature, we measure income inequality by the Gini index (Beck et al., 2007; Sarma and Pais, 2011; Park and Mercado, 2018). As noted, all definitions and corresponding data sources are provided in Appendix 3.1.

## 3.3.2 Financial inclusion index and disaggregated measures

The financial inclusion index is constructed using a hybrid index of aggregate financial inclusion by combining two existing methodologies: (i) the Euclidean distance-based method of Sarma (2008) and (ii) the double PCA method of Camara and Tuesta (2014) and Park and Mercado (2018). As noted, the hybrid index comprises three dimensions: usage, access, and quality of financial services, which we analyse separately. Further, each dimension has its indicators, which we

derived from PCA scores, and we examined the effect of the top two most influential indicators from each dimension. Chapter 2 provides a detailed discussion on the construction of the financial inclusion index, the three dimensions comprising the index, and the top two most important indicators associated with each dimension. A unique feature of this study is that financial inclusion is analysed both at the aggregate level, using the hybrid index measure, as well as at the disaggregated level where the effects of financial inclusion are examined at the dimension and indicator level(s) for each development outcome. Specific details of the data set and the 20 Asian countries used in the analysis are elaborated in Chapter 2.

## 3.3.3 Political risk

Political risk is a measure of institutional quality which can have a direct impact on development outcomes, as well as an indirect impact by enhancing the effectiveness of financial inclusion on development outcomes. The importance of institutional quality on economic growth and development is well established (Scully, 1982; LaPorta et al., 1998; Acemoglu et al., 2005). Weak institutional quality - particularly political factors that lead to higher levels of corruption, internal conflicts, and insecure property rights (Levin and Satarov, 2000) - negatively impacts investment in productive activities (Chong and Calderon, 2000). Chong and Calderon (2000) presented cross-country evidence linking higher institutional quality with improved income inequality over time. In addition, lower political risks encourage investments in the education and health sectors (Glaeser et al., 2004). For instance, Justino et al. (2013) showed that civil conflict deteriorates educational systems by reducing government expenditures in the education sector. Corruption can also significantly reduce government revenue through tax evasion and drive up the price and reduce the level of human capital investment and government services in health (Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Gupta et al., 2001).

Empirical studies have highlighted the importance of political risk factors, such as strengths of legal rights (Grohmann et al., 2018); efficient enforcement of rule of law (Park and Mercado, 2015, 2018); government stability (Claessens and Leaven, 2003); and lower corruption in supporting financial inclusion and financial development (Rojas-Suarez and Amado, 2014; Allen et al., 2016). Accordingly, this study incorporates political risk not only as a separate control variable but also as an interaction term to ascertain whether the effects of financial inclusion is enhanced in the presence of lower political risk. We use political risk ratings taken from the Political Risk Services group data set. $^{4}$ Here, political risk captures uncertainties related to government stability, internal conflict, corruption, religious tensions, law and order, as well as several other social and political attributes. Given the level of financial inclusion in a country, all these risk variables could, directly and indirectly, impact the level of economic development. The measurement unit takes a value between 0 (highest risk) and 12 (lowest risk).

## 3.3.4 Other control variables

The set of control variables used for each development outcome is drawn from the empirical development literature, and a summary description of each control variable is provided in Appendix 3.1.

Concerning economic growth (i.e., per capita real GDP growth) as the dependent variable in the regression model(s), we include initial per capita income, trade openness, life expectancy, inflation, domestic credit to the private sector (percent of GDP), growth of population, average years of schooling, and female labour force participation (percentage of the total labour force) as additional controls. It is standard in the empirical growth literature that the convergence effect is captured by including the real per capita GDP at the beginning of the period. Following Fischer (1993), we include inflation to measure the effect of monetary policies. Trade openness facilitates the use of advanced technologies and promotes investments in new inputs thereby increasing economic growth (Banerjee and Roy, 2014; Yanikkaya, 2003). Our models, therefore, include trade openness as measured by the ratio of the sum of exports and imports to the value of GDP (in US dollars). Life expectancy has a positive effect on economic growth by increasing the number of the working-age population (De la Croix and Licandro, 1999). Financial sector development can also increase the pool of savings and in turn a greater investment in productive activities (Ang, 2008). We use domestic credit to the private sector (percent of GDP) as a proxy for financial development. Becker et al. (1999) stated that in poorer, mainly agricultural, economies with limited human capital and rudimentary technology, a higher population significantly reduces economic growth. Accordingly, we include the growth of the population of the sampled countries. Krueger and Lindahl (2001) argued that the education sector positively contributes to economic growth through various mechanisms including the skills to adopt new technologies, and greater investment in human capital. Accordingly, we include average years of schooling in the growth regressions. Finally, a growing body of literature suggests that increasing women's participation in development can improve economic growth by improving overall family health and, thus, increase household productivity (World Bank, 1994). To capture this relationship, our growth models include female labour participation as a percentage of the total labour force.

In the regressions with education as the outcome variable, we include population under age 15, growth of per capita GDP, government expenditure on education, life expectancy at birth years, and pupil-teacher ratio at primary schools as control variables. Simon and Pilarski (1979) argued that an increasing population size reduces the amount of education that children receive. Hence, to capture this relationship, we include the population under age 15 in the education regressions. Public education expenditure provides an assessment of a government's priorities in education and a commitment to invest in human capital (Jung and Thorbecke, 2003) and, thus, government expenditure on education captures this effect in our models. The links between health and education are well established in the literature. For example, healthy children can learn better and thus positively contribute

to long-run economic growth. To capture this effect, we include life expectancy in the education regression. Finally, following Dearden et al. (2002), we include pupil-teacher ratio at primary schools to capture the effect of better learning and teaching environments on educational attainment.

In the regressions with health as the outcome variable, we include growth of per capita GDP, adult female literacy rate, the prevalence of undernourishment, births attended by skilled health staff, government expenditure on the health sector, and expected years of schooling as control variables as all these variables have significant effects on child mortality rate (Galiani et al., 2005). For example, adult female literacy reduces child mortality rates because literate women can seek information for the betterment of health, nutrition, and education of their household members than illiterate women. In other words, higher levels of female illiteracy might be associated with poor levels of child health. Well-nourished children grow into healthy adults and, in turn, give their children a better start in life. Further, well-nourished women face fewer risks during pregnancy and childbirth, and their children set off on a firmer developmental path, both physically and mentally (Feeny and Ouattara, 2013).

Finally, in the regressions with income inequality as the dependent variable, we include growth of per capita GDP, trade openness, inflation, female labour force participation (percent of the total labour force), growth of population, life expectancy at birth, total and average years of schooling as additional controls. The extant literature suggests that these variables have a significant effect on income inequality. Hence, following Bjørnskov (2010), we include per capita income to test the Kuznets curve, which shows an inverted U-shape relationship between per capita income and income inequality. We also include population growth, following Ram (1984) who argued that population growth has a significantly negative effect on income distribution, as poor households could be affected by high fertility rates and temporary economic declines. Lin and Fu (2016) suggested that trade liberalisation promotes smooth distribution of income in developing countries as trade may increase the real return to the factor that is relatively abundant, including low-skilled workers. Trade openness is therefore included in the income inequality regressions.

## 3.4 Empirical methodology

This study considers a system of moment equations using the generalised method of moments (GMM) proposed by Blundell and Bond (1998) to tackle the possible issue of reverse causality that may exist between financial inclusion and economic development. $^{6}$ For example, countries with increasing economic growth may experience increasing financial inclusion. Higher economic growth leads to a higher standard of living, lower poverty, greater access and usage of financial products, and thus may significantly determine the level of financial inclusion. Also, other development outcomes, for example, education, can impact the level of financial inclusion of an economy. Educated people can understand the various financial products in the market, make informed decisions, and hence can

improve their access to these products. Pena et al. (2014) stated that education is a way of measuring knowledge, skill sets, and the capacity to make decisions in formal financial markets. This indicates a positive association between financial inclusion and education. Similarly, better health outcomes can influence financial inclusion positively. A healthy economy signals more productive workers, better access to health-related financial products, such as credit and health insurance. This may in turn influence higher financial inclusion. Finally, income inequality can also influence financial inclusion in a less-developed country. Lower income inequality implies a higher standard of living. This could lead to higher financial development and a greater proportion of the population being able to access banking services, secure credit, insurance, and other financial products.

To address the reverse causality issues, the following equation is estimated in a system-GMM specification (Blundell and Bond, 2000):

$$
\begin{array}{l} D O _ {i t} = \complement_ {0} + \complement_ {1} D O _ {i t - 1} + \complement_ {2} F I _ {i t - 1} + \complement_ {3} \left(F I _ {i t - 1} * P R _ {i t - 1}\right) \\ + \complement_ {4} P R _ {i t - 1} + \complement_ {5} X _ {i t - 1} + \lambda_ {t} + \mu_ {i} + \varepsilon_ {i t} \\ \end{array}
$$

where $i$ denotes the country $(i = 1,\dots,22)$ and $t$ denotes the time $(t = 2004,\dots,2015)$ . $DO_{it}$ shows development outcomes, which take the following measures: economic growth, education (expected years of schooling), health (under-5 child mortality rate), and income inequality (Gini coefficient), respectively. $DO_{it-1}$ captures the previous year's realisations of a particular development outcome. Similarly, $FI_{it-1}$ denotes the level of financial inclusion, $PR_{it-1}$ refers to political risk rating, and $X_{it-1}$ is a vector of control variables specific to a development outcome. $^{6}$ Also, $\lambda_{i}$ denotes the time-fixed effect, $\mu$ denotes country fixed effects and $\varepsilon_{u}$ shows the idiosyncratic error term. In addition, all variables including the outcomes variables are transformed into their logarithmic form. The main reason is that the log-log specification smooths the data and allows for the interpretation of the coefficients as elasticities (Mishra and Newhouse, 2009). The most important coefficient of interest of this study is $\mathbb{C}_2$ . If $\mathbb{C}_2$ is statistically significant and positive, financial inclusion, therefore, makes an important contribution to promoting development outcomes in Asian countries.

The GMM approach allows estimating a regression equation in differences and a regression equation in levels simultaneously, with each equation using its own set of instrumental variables (i.e., see Block, 2002; Narayan et al., 2011; Hasan et al., 2009). The plausibility of the instruments potentially depends on the consistency of the lagged values of the independent variables. Arellano and Bond (1991) and Arellano and Bover (1995) proposed two tests of specifications to verify the consistency of the instruments. The first one is the Sargan test of overidentifying restrictions which tests the overall validity of the instruments by analysing the sample analogue of the moment conditions used in the estimation process. Failure to reject the null hypothesis (which states overidentifying restrictions are valid) gives support to the model. The second test examines the presence of autocorrelation in the error process. Our findings from the study pass

both the overidentifying restrictions and autocorrelation in the error process. Moreover, one major drawback of system-GMM estimation is the inclusion of too many instruments, which may introduce a bias in the coefficient estimates. Following Roodman (2009), we also control this by using the collapse option in all system-GMM specifications. Thus, our empirical specification shows that the basic identification assumptions of the system-GMM are robust.

## 3.5 Empirical results

This section reports on the empirical results for each of the development outcome specifications, namely, economic growth, education, health, and inequality. $^{7}$ The results for each development outcome are first reported at the aggregate level using the hybrid FI index and at the dimension level of financial inclusion, specifically usage, access, and quality, and presented in a single table (i.e., Tables 3.1, 3.3, 3.5, and 3.7). Consequently, we present the results for each development outcome showing the impact for the highest and second-highest ranked indicators for each dimension of financial inclusion (i.e., Tables 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, and 3.8). At each level of analysis (i.e., aggregate index, dimension, and indicators), particular attention is given to the effect of political risks, not only in terms of its direct effect on development outcomes but also indirectly through its interaction effect with financial inclusion. Further, a particular set of control variables is included for each development outcome based on our discussion in the previous section. We discuss the results here based on each development outcome.

## 3.5.1 Economic growth and financial inclusion

Table 3.1 presents the results at the index level (specifications 1 and 2) and the dimension level (specifications 3-6) concerning per capita economic growth. All model specifications incorporate political risk ratings, whilst an interaction term between political risk and financial inclusion is added in specification 2 at the index level, and in specifications 4-6 at the dimension level. At the index level, specifications 1 and 2 (before and after interaction, respectively) in Table 3.1 reveal that the financial inclusion index has a strong positive and significant relationship with economic growth, as do several other covariates including initial income per capita, life expectancy, financial deepening (i.e., domestic private credit as a percentage of GDP), and population growth. Further, the signs for all the coefficients for all the parameter estimates are in the expected directions. Political risk as a stand-alone control variable exerts a statistically significant positive relationship with economic growth across both specifications. However, we do not find statistical significance as an interaction term.

Unpacking financial inclusion to its individual dimensions, results for specification 3 (without political risk interaction) and specifications 4-6 (with interaction) reveal that usage represents the only financial inclusion dimension that has a positive relationship with economic growth under all four specifications (i.e., specifications 3-6). $^{8}$ Results reveal that neither access nor quality dimension
