for all authority comes from God,

and the existing authorities are ordered by him.

It follows that anyone who is insubordinate to authority

is resisting the orders of God,

and insubordinate people have themselves to thank, and so on.

In Paul's view the Roman administration maintained an ordered structure of society (not necessarily one that was fair or kind) which would permit the corporate lives of Jew and Gentile to be united in Christ. When a few years later the Jews revolted against Rome, that union became impossible.

Paul is saying the dutiful things - with what we might call a poker face - about Roman officials, from those who hold the power of the sword (capital punishment) and so are of high rank to local administrators of taxes and levies. Such dutiful remarks may stand the church in good stead if the authorities become hostile; and in any case the majority of people could have little influence on government (as was indeed so until the mid-nineteenth century in Britain). The authorities are instituted by God, God's agents for the common good and for punishing offenders. (In verse 4 NRSV has 'to execute wrath on the wrongdoer'. This is one way of making the divine anger effective: see p. 107). Only wrongdoers will fear them; governments hold no terrors for the law-abiding but only for the criminal.

That remark purports to be an approving description, but it is in fact an accusation. Pay tax and levy, reverence and respect, to those to whom they are due. But to whom are they due? To authorities who give approval to the law-abiding, and hand criminals over to the consequences of their wrong-doing; to governments whose actions raise no objection from your conscience. But few governments pass those tests. Many governments abuse law-abiding people and treat them cruelly because they can be exploited for the benefit of the rich and powerful. Paul's insistence that the authorities are instituted by God brings them into the world of religion. The slogan 'Keep religion out of politics' disregards Paul - and indeed much of the biblical tradition. In describing the authority, Paul uses two terms familiar in Hellenistic life for civic officials and public servants: one is 'deacon' (v. 4, translated as agents, which is also the description of Phoebe in 16.1) and the other is 'minister' (v. 6, translated as in God's service, which is also Paul's self-description in 15.16 'a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles'). Paul and Phoebe were what they were because the civil administration had crucified Jesus Christ, and in no sense were Roman officials to be regarded as Christian ministers. Nevertheless they were servants and agents of God who needed the

support, reverence and respect of Christians, in so far as the civil administration itself was true to its calling. When long afterwards it became possible for the majority to influence government, Paul's view of the God-given nature of government requires Christians to be concerned with public order, the reward of goodness and the restraint of wickedness, the conscientious examination of laws, and even the purpose, size, and proper use of taxes.

13.8-10 Taxes are an obligation, but so is love. Not only family love, or love for one another in the Christian community (described in 12.9-16), but the practice of love in the wider community. Love for one's neighbour (as in vv. 9 and 10) indeed, so long as neighbour carries the meaning of fellow human being, the other person (as in v. 8). To most of us neighbour still has a smallish local reference; but with modern communications' techniques, the other person may be both far away and in intimate contact.

To make his point, Paul uses the second part of the Ten Commandments (Ex. 20.2-17; Deut. 5.6-21). The first part confines worship to the God, who brought Israel out of Egypt, prohibits images and the wrong use of the divine name, and establishes the Sabbath. Since that would be distractive for a mixed Jew and Gentile congregation - and in any case God is now defined as the Lord who raised Christ on the first day of the week - nothing is here said about duty to God or the cultic rules of the Instruction. Of the six Commandments in the second part Paul cites no adultery, murder, theft, or coveting. The order is unimportant: it varied in a number of ancient sources. The omissions (respect for parents, malice towards neighbours) were probably thought too domestic; but Paul rather grandly waves his hand and says - and any other commandment there may be (in this area of community behaviour) are all summed up in the one rule, Love your neighbour as yourself.

That rule from Lev. 19.18 comes from one of the more heart-warming chapters of the book, something like the Ten Commandments applied to everyday life. Thus harvesters are to leave enough for the poor to gather; no stealing, cheating or deceiving of your neighbour; wages are to be promptly paid; no contemptuous unconcern for the deaf and blind; respect for the aged; and a foreigner is to be treated as a native born - 'love him as yourself, because you were aliens in Egypt'. Before Paul's Epistle it seems that explicit reference to Lev. 19.18 is not found in Jewish writings, but they certainly express the conviction that love for God and neighbour are the basis of Jewish life. In a collection of imagined farewell speeches by the forefathers of Israel, the Testament of the Twelve

Patriarchs (perhaps a hundred years or more before Paul), that conviction is present, e.g. Throughout all your life love the Lord, and one another with a true heart' (Test. Dan. 5.3). It was standard Jewish teaching that human beings are made in the image of God, so that an offence against a human being is disregard of God. According to Mark 12.28-34 Jesus defined the primary commandments as love of God according to Deut. 6.5 and love of neighbour according to Lev. 19.18 - and a Jewish scribe agreed with him. So Paul is well within Jewish tradition; but whereas Jewish teachers accepted love of neighbour as the commandment from which all other commandments could be deduced, so implying the necessity of obedience to all other commandments, Paul used love of neighbour to indicate the manner in which any rule should be carried out. Hence his sensitive treatment of the problems disclosed in chapters 14-15.

Hence love cannot wrong a neighbour. That negative form is more practical than the positive. If you are a conscientious Christian and are told to love your neighbour you will start searching for loving activities - wondering how far you should go, wondering whether you will irritate rather than help, possibly causing offence by implying criticism, and so on. Loving your neighbour demands a good deal of mutual respect, confidence, and frankness. On the other hand, if you say That would hurt my neighbour' you may be on safer ground. And such love may be the fulfilment of the law or (in the more helpful earlier phrase) it may meet every requirement of the law.

# Salvation is near

13.11-14

13.11-14 This comprehensive practice of love is to be your aim as you remember that this is the hour of crisis. Other translations are less alarmist: NRSV has 'the moment to wake out of sleep'. Hour of crisis represents a time word (meaning not length of time but appropriate time) which Paul has used more than once already, e.g. in 8.18 'the sufferings we now endure'. To us crisis means a decisive moment of great difficulty with the risk of danger. Perhaps Paul had that feeling. He told his readers to 'conform no longer to the pattern of the present world' (12.2) and he may have urged them to serve the present critical time (12.11; see p. 106). They are to wake up to the change that is about to take place. Deliverance (from ancient hostilities towards God and rival human communities) is nearer to us than it was when we first believed (i.e. became Christians). It is far on in the night; day is near - imagery that has deep roots in Jewish expectation.

These are the words of the Lord:

In the time of my favour I answered you;

on the day of deliverance I came to your aid.

I have formed you, and destined you

to be a light for peoples ...

I said to the prisoners, 'Go free',

and to those in darkness, 'Come out into the open' (Isa. 49.8-9).

In the Old Testament there are sixteen references to the Day of the Lord, mostly promising God's devastating warfare against Israel's enemies (only Amos suggests that there may be devastating consequences for Israel as well). Paul makes standard references to that Day in 2.5 and 16; and in possibly his earliest letter the imagery of the suddenly-occurring Day of the Lord is strongly developed, with the alert Christian 'armed with the breastplate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation for a helmet (I Thess. 5.2-11). To the Romans Paul says Let Christ Jesus himself be the armour that you wear. In other words, when night turns to day, the Lord will bring in major changes and there will be a fight - in which Christians will take part.

But their only protection will be their faith in Christ, and their rules of engagement will be his rules. We are to behave with decency as befits the day, not with the indecencies that are commonplace in most social groups. Paul gives an extract from his more comprehensive list in Gal. 5.19-21 of what used to be called sins of the flesh. They are sinful because people use the power of being in a group to dominate and suborn members, so as to set up quarrels or jealousies, to go beyond all enjoyment and safety in riotous behaviour, drunkenness, group sex, and debauchery. Two examples from the ancient world: (a) riotous behaviour: 'The Gentiles filled the temple with licentious revelry; they took their pleasure with prostitutes and had intercourse with women in the sacred precincts' II Macc. 6.4; (b) A bad servant 'says to himself "The master is a long time coming", and begins to bully the other servants and to eat and drink with his drunken friends' Matt. 24:48-49. How dreadful human beings are when their chief social pleasures are cruelty and group sex! Give your flesh no opportunity to satisfy its desires.

What Paul expected to happen when day succeeded night is not clear. Certainly he expected Jews and Gentiles to change their minds about the relations of their communities to one another, to God, and to morality. But would there be any significant happening? In previous Epistles Paul had used the vivid language of waiting expectantly for God's Son from heaven, bringing the dead with him and saving us from the wrath to come (I Thess. 1.10; 4.14-18). The day of the Lord is transferred from our God to Jesus (I Thess. 5.2; I Cor. 1.7-8; 3.13), so 'wait until the Lord comes. He will bring to light what darkness hides and disclose our inner motives' (I Cor. 4.5). There is even a planned and orderly scheme for resurrection, beginning with Christ, then at his coming, those who belong to Christ, and so on (I Cor. 15.22-26). 'The day of Christ Jesus' appears again in Phil. 1.6, 10, an Epistle probably written after Romans.

But in Romans itself the day of the Lord Jesus is nowhere mentioned, and nothing is said about his coming from heaven. Is he not interceding for us at God's right hand (Rom. 8.34)? We shall be saved through Christ from the Anger but by his life, not specifically by his coming (Rom. 5.9-10). Is it not likely that the coming of God's Son from heaven is as much metaphorical as the grafting in of the wild olive? Some Christians at Thessalonica must have supposed so because they thought it was already here (II Thess. 2.2), and a similar view at Corinth may explain some Christians' assertion that there is no resurrection of the dead (I Cor. 15.12). Is it not likely that the coming from heaven must be metaphorical if it is to have continuing theological validity? Perhaps so! But Paul expected something to

happen. 'We exult in the hope of the divine glory that is to be ours' - 'the glory, as yet unrevealed, which is in store for us' (5.2; 8.18). What does Paul imply, towards the end of the Epistle, when he says that he has completed the preaching of the gospel of Christ from Jerusalem as far round as Illyricum, and must soon set out for Spain? Is he not working towards an apostolic dead-line? If our own Christianity is to be apostolic, must we not always be anticipating the end of the present phase and preparing ourselves for the next?

## Mutual acceptance

14.1-15.13

14.1-12 But whatever the expected happening, it was not going to happen yet - and Paul had been informed of difficulties among the Roman Christians. With a mixed community of Jews and Gentiles that was not surprising. The Jews had recently been in trouble with the authorities: 'Claudius had issued an edict that all Jews should leave Rome' (Acts 18.2) probably in AD 49, though how effective was the edict and how long it lasted, nobody knows. How could Christian Jews defend themselves against fellow Jews if they failed to buy meat that was kosher and wine that was tithed, if they abandoned Sabbath and the festivals? Or perhaps the perplexities of 'meat consecrated to an idol' (I Cor. 8 and 10) had upset Rome as well as Corinth. Or perhaps this was not a Jewish problem at all but the propaganda of an ascetic Hellenistic sect that longed for the devout simple life. It does not greatly matter that we cannot confidently identify the particular features: the main point is that some are weak in faith. Not that they lack faith, but their faith needs support to convince themselves (and perhaps others) that they indeed possess faith.

Paul's persuasive rhetoric becomes more accessible to modern readers if his presumptions, examples, and conclusions are set out in logical order. Thus, God has accepted each Christian as his household servant (v. 3) - which is the meaning of 'justification' - so that whether he stands or falls is his own Master's business, and he will take care of that (v. 4). In the end we shall all stand before God's tribunal, as Isa. 45.23 indicates (vv. 10-11). Hence each Christian will be answerable to God (v. 12). Thus it is that none of us lives, and equally none of us dies for himself alone (i.e. without reference to others). Living or dying we are responsible to the Lord and we belong to the lordship that was achieved by Christ's death and resurrection (vv. 7-9). Now consider the question about permissible food. Some of you have faith strong enough to eat all kinds of food (v. 2) and when they eat meat they give thanks to God and so honour the Lord (v. 6). Others among you, being weaker in faith, eat only vegetables (v. 2) but they have the Lord in mind when abstaining, since they too give thanks to

God (v. 6). To take another example, some make a distinction between this day and that; others regard all days alike. Everyone must act on his own convictions but, in any case, those who honour the day honour the Lord (vv. 5-6). Why then (if you are not confident in faith) pass judgment on your fellow-Christian? Or (if you are confident in faith) why do you look down on your fellow-Christian? (v. 10). So this is the rule: Accept anyone who is weak in faith, without debate about his misgivings (v. 1). However much the church may have to give thought to such problems, those who eat meat must not look down on those who do not, and those who do not eat meat must not pass judgment on those who do (v. 3). That argument has secured for individual believers a highly personal responsibility to the Lord. Everyone must act on his own convictions or (as NRSV translates) 'Let all be fully convinced in their own minds.' But that is asking a great deal. Our convictions are often a rag-bag of ideas picked up from family and social group, or revolted against. Being fully convinced in our minds implies willingness to weigh up an argument and make decisions. Paul may thus make it possible for Jewish converts to decide against the ancient practices of Israel, but it does not protect them from pressures experienced in membership of their new Jewish-Gentile Christian community. To that he now turns. Once again it will be instructive to work out the underlying sequence of his thought.

14.13-23 When Paul speaks (not frequently) of the kingdom of God he usually mentions who or what does not belong to it. Here it means in effect the practical obligations of being the people of God - hence not matters of eating and drinking, but justice (i.e. acceptable community behaviour), peace, and joy, inspired by the Holy Spirit (v. 17). Everyone who shows himself a servant of Christ in this way is acceptable to God and approved by men (v. 18). The Christian life is indeed distinctive but it is not dominated by a need to assert and maintain separation from others.

Paul now asserts his own conviction, as of one confident in faith: All that I know of the Lord Jesus convinces me that nothing (i.e. no kind of food) is impure in itself; only, if anyone considers something impure, then for him it is impure (v. 14). Everything is pure in itself, but it is wrong to eat if by eating you cause another to stumble. Do not destroy the work of God (i.e. the Christian community) for the sake of food (v. 20). Place no obstacle or stumbling block in a fellow-Christian's way (v. 13). You must not let what you think good be brought into disrepute (v. 16). If your fellow-Christian is outraged by what you eat, then you are no longer guided by love. Do not by your eating be the ruin of one for whom Christ died! (v. 15) It is right to abstain front eating meat or drinking wine or from anything

to prove his theological convictions, but was showing how, with those convictions, scripture - the Instruction, the Prophets, and the Writings - could be read. Deuteronomy 32 could support Paul's theology if read not in the Hebrew but in the Greek tradition; Isa. 11 if it was lifted out of its original historical situation and applied to Paul's day; Ps. 18 if its strong prejudices were contradicted, in the knowledge that Ps. 117 would see Paul safe home. With Paul you cannot talk naively about the authority of scripture but only about the authority of the Spirit, who is the Spirit of Christ (8.9), applied to scripture.

There is a concluding prayer of mutual acceptance. The life of faith in a God who works by death and resurrection is based on hope - confident expectation. Remember Abraham in an impossible situation (4.18); hope of recovering the divine glory (5.2); being put to the test and ending with a hope that does not shame us (5.4-5); the hope of creation being set free (8.20-21); hope that keeps us joyful (12.12); the encouragement of the scriptures to maintain hope and perseverance (15.4) - until by the power of the Holy Spirit, you overflow with hope.

# Rome's importance in Paul's plans

15.14-33

At last Paul resumes the formal beginning of the Epistle in 1.8-15 which mentioned his 'eagerness to declare the gospel to you in Rome'. That community is full of goodness, equipped with knowledge of every kind, well able to give advice to one another. It is a competent, autonomous community. An apostle uses tact and cannot dominateer. They must make their own decisions. But because of the gift he had from God, Paul writes to remind them of something. Of what? Probably of the conditions on which Gentiles can become Christian. Paul is a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles in the priestly service of the gospel of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles may be acceptable, consecrated by the Holy Spirit. The REB translation of verse 15 has been brought closer to the Greek so that we can consider what Paul actually said: 'the offering of the Gentiles' is ambiguous. It could mean 'the offering that the Gentiles make'; or possibly 'the Gentiles regarded as an offering', which is what REB intends. What could it mean? 'We have captured the Gentiles and made them (Jewish) Christians like ourselves?' The great missionary movement of modern times worked on those lines. Fifty years ago ministers in West Africa wore clerical collars and black suits, despite the splendid garments of their own tradition. Christian congregations were taught to sing European type hymns which in a tonal language are inappropriate and sometimes meaningless. Devoted missionaries captured the hearts of many West Africans and offered them to God in the European image, instead of encouraging them to find African offerings appropriate to Christ. The latter was Paul's aim. If you offer a gift to someone, the manner of offering the gift is sometimes as important as the gift itself. A priest is someone who knows the appropriate offering and the right way to make it. When Gentiles became Christians (by faith, not by law fulfilment) they had many gifts to offer God - some suitable, some inappropriate. Their specially-appointed apostle says: 'I have self-confidence ('I have grounds for pride' is the complacent remark of a chairman's report) in Christ Jesus as regards the proper approach to God. But I would not dare to say anything except what Christ has achieved through me to bring the Gentiles into his allegiance, by word and

deed ("I have spoken and things happened"), by the power of signs and portents (the standard Old Testament idiom for what happens when people are brought out of slavery into freedom), and by the power of the Holy Spirit.

But what next should Paul do? He had completed the preaching of the gospel of Christ from Jerusalem as far round as Illyricum. If you have a modern map of the eastern Mediterranean you could be shown places attached to Paul in a great arc from Israel, through Turkey, southern Greece to Greek Macedonia (15.26), but not further north, i.e. not Albania and the remaining east coast of the Adriatic, which was the ancient Illyricum. The evidence is in the addresses of Paul's Epistles and Acts 7-28. It is an enormous area in which to have completed the preaching of the gospel of Christ, even if he went only as far as the border of Illyricum; even if he was not the only evangelist at work and Paul made a point of taking the gospel to places where the name of Christ had not been heard, not wanting to build on another man's foundation (v. 20). Three things become plain about Paul as an evangelist: (a) even though he is the apostle of the Gentiles he does not regard them as his property and power base; (b) he really does trust the newly-formed Christian communities to evangelize neighbouring areas; and (c) as scripture says (Isa. 52.15, the beginning of the poem about the Suffering Servant) he was prepared to preach Christ when 'many Gentiles recoil at the sight of him, and kings curl their lips in disgust' as Isaiah said.

He has been prevented from visiting Rome by the task described in verses 19-20. He regards himself as a sort of ombudsman for the Gentiles, making sure that they are not under pressure to come in as pseudo-Jewish Christians. He has set up his markers and must now move on. His mind is on Spain: there is an area to be opened up before the expected great shift of understanding takes place in the Roman world. Not surprisingly he wants to visit Rome, the centre of the Gentile world, and to involve Rome in his apostolic perception of the forthcoming change. But he also wants to involve them in Jerusalem, the centre of the Jewish world to which they owe the essential perceptions of their faith in Christ. Almost certainly their involvement would require them to support his journey to Spain with escorts and guide, but before that to support with prayer his errand to Jerusalem. To do so they must understand what is at stake. The Christians of Macedonia and Achaia have resolved to raise a fund for the benefit of the poor among God's people at Jerusalem (v. 26). On the principle that members of a family look after their kindred in need, the Gentile Christians of Greece are claiming the family privilege of supporting Jewish Christians in Jerusalem. In order that a fund for

material needs should not seem an embarrassing return for spiritual treasures, Paul himself is taking the gifts, but he is not at all sure what the response will be. No doubt there will be Jewish opponents, and probably Jewish Christian opponents as well, not at all convinced by Paul's determination that Gentile Christians must not be required to accept rules of the Mosaic Instruction. This fund was not a recent project: in earlier days the Jerusalem apostles had agreed separate areas of evangelism with Paul on condition that he should 'keep in mind the poor', which he always made it his business to do (Gal. 2.10); and some of the practical arrangements are mentioned in I Cor. 16.1-4 and II Cor. 8.19-21. But Luke's description of Paul's arrival in Jerusalem says nothing about the fund or its reception, and there is merely a passing mention of 'charitable gifts' in one of Paul's speeches of self-defence (Acts 21.17-26; 24.17). According to Luke, the Jerusalem Christians claimed to have 'many thousands of converts ... among the Jews, all of them staunch upholders of the law', and the 'new way', as it was called, was well known to the Roman authorities. But even though Paul was under arrest, and at Caesarea open arrest, for two years, Luke says nothing about support from the Christians (Acts 21.20; 24.22-23, 27). Whatever may be thought about the accuracy or selectivity of Luke's story, it seems likely that the fund was not a success, that Paul went to Rome as a prisoner and was welcomed there by fellow-Christians (Acts 28.14-15). Luke ends his story with Paul 'openly and without hindrance' preaching the gospel. Whether he was then released and went to Spain is quite unknown.

The enormous care that Paul devoted to the fund, the good intentions of Greek Christians uniting concern for the poor and respect for the mother church, ended in some kind of disaster. For Paul it led to imprisonment, the end of far-flung, imaginative evangelism, and probably death. But this is what Christians may expect if they serve a God who works by death and resurrection. Paul's great mission field 'from Jerusalem as far round as Illyricum' and across the sea to Rome shrank in size, perception, and confidence - but within a century his Epistles were at the centre of Western Christianity, and his thought has permeated all subsequent theology.

One more observation is necessary. Even an apostle, even the apostle of the Gentiles, can be full of apprehension, not knowing whether he may find acceptance with God's people. Appealing not to a church that he has founded but to the Christians of Rome he wants their support, he wants to enjoy their company for a while, he wants allies in the fight that is likely, he wants to enjoy a time of rest with them, to find in their company the God of peace. Can we not say Amen to all that?

# Greetings to the community

16.1-16

Since Paul sends greetings to twenty-eight people by name it is not surprising that he longs for their support. But it is perhaps surprising that he has so many friends in a church he had neither founded nor visited. Ephesus (it has been suggested) would be a more likely congregation (Acts 18-19). Is it possible that copies of Romans were sent to Pauline churches and that we possess the copy sent to Ephesus with appropriate local greetings? It must be admitted that ancient manuscripts of the Epistle display some oddities. For example, the doxology in verses 25-27 sometimes turns up at the end of chapter 14, once at the end of chapter 15. And the grace at the end of verse 20 sometimes appears as verse 24 (omitted from modern translations), sometimes at the end of verse 27. This technical information makes it fairly certain that when Romans was copied in the early centuries of the church, its ending (no longer relevant) was shortened and tidied up; but the ingenious Ephesian proposal has rightly not gathered support. On the other hand, the list of names has provoked growing interest.

16.1-2 Paul gives Phoebe, who perhaps carried the Epistle, an introduction to the community in Rome. She is a minister in the church at Cenchrae (the eastern port of Corinth). Paul's word for her is 'deacon' which means servant or helper (perhaps a little more formal in 'the bishops and deacons' in Phil. 1.1). Instead of good friend NRSV has 'benefactor': she was a woman of influence and wealth, taking responsibility in the church, helping out the apostle himself, and commended as a suitable delegate to Christians in Rome.

16.3-5 The Jewish wife and husband, Prisca and Aquila, are old associates of Paul. He first met them at Corinth when they had left Rome because of the edict of Claudius against Roman Jews (Acts 18.1 - and see also 18.18-28). They are now back in Rome and an ecclesia meets in their house. Paul is grateful to them, not only because they risked their necks to save his life (nothing is known about that) but also because they had been prominent in the conversion of
