resisting full proselytization. They were sufficiently numerous and their presence sufficiently constant in Hellenistic Judaism for a technical term to be devised to describe them: they were "God-fearers" (Acts 10:2, 22; 13:16, 26).

From the very beginning of its days in Jerusalem the Christian church numbered among its members active Hellenistic (Greek-speaking) Jews, the "Hellenists" of Acts 6, who were the spearhead of the movement of Christianity into the Hellenistic world. They understood the Greek world; they were missionary-minded and theologically venturesome. Even without the persecution that drove them out of Jerusalem they would certainly have become Christian missionaries among their fellow Greek-speaking Jews, among the "God-fearers," and to the Hellenistic world at large. Persecution hastened the process. It is permissible, therefore, to speak of Hellenistic Jewish Mission Christianity, the Greek-speaking Jewish Christianity that carried the gospel into the Hellenistic world.

The literary monument to this movement is the Acts of the Apostles. The author of Acts is himself a product of the movement, and in his work he has given us a dramatic and dramatized account of it. The speeches he reports are particularly important, for they represent typical samples of Hellenistic Jewish Christian preaching in synagogues, to "God-fearers," and on the street corners of the Greek cities.

Theologically, Hellenistic Jewish Mission Christianity was such that it was almost explosively creative. In it Jewish, Hellenistic, and developing Christian traditions met and interacted with dynamic results that are today the backbone of New Testament theology. An illustration is the developments in Christology. In Palestinian Jewish Christianity Jesus was characteristically "Messiah," i.e., the one anointed [chosen] by God, or "Son of Man," i.e., eschatological judge and redeemer. He was also "Lord" in the Aramaic form Mar⁸ and Mar is an Aramaic honorific designation used especially of persons with authority to judge. In Hellenistic Jewish Mission Christianity, The Hebrew "Messiah" became the Greek "Christ," but it lost its force so that "Jesus Christ" became practically a proper name rather than meaning "Jesus, the anointed one of God." "Son of Man" was abandoned because in Greek it had no meaning, being replaced by either "Son of God" or "Lord." In Hellenism, Son of God indicated "possessing divine qualities," "exhibiting a divine aura," or the like, and how Jesus came to be regarded as Son of God can be seen in the cycle of miracle stories now found in Mark 5 and 7: the Gerasene Demoniac (5:1-20: the reference to the Decapolis in verse 20 indicates that this is Greek territory), Jairus' Daughter and the Woman with the Hemorrhage (5:21-43); the Syrophoenician Woman (7:24-30); the Man with a Speech Impediment [again in the Decapolis, 7:31-37]. In all these, Jesus exhibits an aura of divine power--he heals by flat, at a distance, or by the touch of his garments, and so on--and there are enough explicit references to Greek places and non-Jewish people and still enough contacts with Judaism, to show that these stories developed in Hellenistic Jewish Christianity. That these stories are designed to exhibit why Jesus is Son of God is seen from the occurrence of the title in the introduction to the whole section (3:11) and in the first story

[5-7] "Son of God" was also used in apocalyptic contexts where Palestinian Christianity would have used "Son of Man" (e.g., I Thess 1:10, "to wait for his [God's] Son from heaven"). But the major christological development concerned the use of the title "Lord" (Greek kyrios). In Hellenism it was the most common honorific title, used for gods, emperors, and kings, as well as for men of power and authority everywhere. Hellenistic Jewish Christianity developed this title extensively, so that the confession "Jesus | Christ| is Lord" became the characteristic Christian confession, and the coming of Jesus as judge was now his coming as Lord rather than as Son of Man (e.g., I Thess 4:15).

Hellenistic Jewish Christianity was equally creative in other respects. It made extensive and imaginative use of the Septuagint, as the speeches in Acts show. It adapted and developed the liturgy of the Jewish synagogue for its own use, devising confessions and liturgical formulas of all kinds. It laid great stress on the resurrection, both in liturgy (the formula-like references to "God who raised Jesus from the dead" in Paul's letters are from the Hellenistic Jewish Christian liturgy, as is his christological confessional formula in Rom 1:3-4) and in preaching (the speeches in Acts). When in Rom 10:9 Paul says, "If you confess with your lips that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved," he is breathing the very spirit of Hellenistic Jewish Mission Christianity.

## Gentile Christianity (Apart from Paul)

Christianity began as an apocalyptic sect within ancient Palestinian Judaism and moved into the Gentile world through the Hellenistic Jewish Christian mission. But once established in the Gentile world it tended to take on emphases of its own, no longer necessarily dependent on the Palestinian Judaism that spawned it, nor on the Hellenistic Judaism that propelled it into the wider world. It interpreted itself in new ways in response to the challenges of the new environment, and it reached new understandings of itself and its Lord by using the categories available in the Hellenistic Gentile culture. An apocalyptic Jewish sect begun in Palestine and continued as a missionary movement within Hellenistic Judaism now became a cult in the world of Hellenistic religiosity and began to exhibit many of the characteristics of that religiosity. We deal with the details when we discuss Paul and his relations with the church at Corinth in chapter 5; for the moment we will simply draw a general picture of Hellenistic Gentile Christianity as Paul found it.

Hellenism was a world of contrasts. Greek culture offered a conception of a good, harmonious life in a world in which the reality experienced daily tended to be neither good nor harmonious. Until the Augustan peace in 27 B.C. warfare was constant, and as a result, a family would be living prosperously in a city one year and its members would be dead or sold into slavery the next. The growth of cities and the emphasis on urban living created the need to feed the inhabitants of those cities, a problem never satisfactorily solved, and so famine became an ever present and all too frequent possibility. Further, the "closure of the Eurasian ecumene," $^{9}$ the establishment of one Eurasian world,

led not only to a dramatic cultural interchange, but also to the spread of diseases against which the inhabitants of one part or other of that world had no natural immunity. All this led to a focus on "fate" and to a longing for salvation from the vicissitudes of life and the ever present fear of death. There spread through the Hellenistic world a series of "mystery cults," religions promising their initiates security and immortality. The hero, or heroine, of a mystery cult was characteristically a divine figure who had conquered life in the world and achieved immortality and who could promise a share in that conquest and that immortality to the believer who would accept initiation into the rites of the cult. The rites were "mysteries" kept rigidly secret from all but the initiates. They generally consisted of some kind of recital or reenactment of the deeds of the hero or heroine, an act of initiation, and the eating of a sacred meal, by which the initiate came to share the divine power and immortality of the deity.

That Christianity could be interpreted as a cult within Hellenism is obvious at first glance. It too had its myth of the hero, the gospel story of Jesus; its initiation rite, baptism; its sacred meal. The Christians did not borrow directly from the mystery cults, it was rather that the Christian faith came to expression most naturally in a way responsive to the particular needs of the environment of which it became a part. Were it not capable of doing so, it could never have been established in that environment. But Christianity did establish itself and in so doing developed different emphases from what had gone before. For one thing, it was difficult to maintain the traditional Jewish-Christian apocalyptic hope with its expectation of the coming of Jesus as Son of Man, and judgment and transformation of the earth. The Greeks thought more naturally in terms of redemption from the world to a higher level of existence than of the transformation of the world itself, and with the spread of Greek culture in the Hellenistic world, this style of thinking became generally accepted. Significantly, the deeper Paul gets into the Hellenistic world, the less we hear about the characteristic apocalyptic hope of Jewish Christianity. Then a real problem was posed by the characteristic Christian emphasis on the resurrection of Jesus and the hope of the future resurrection of the believer. The Greek world thought more naturally in terms of the immortality of the soul than of the resurrection of the body, and that created the problems for the Christian belief dramatized by the author of the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 17, especially verse 32) and amply evident in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians. On the other hand, religious enthusiasm was very much a part of the Hellenistic world in general, and so the Christian emphasis on the possession of the Spirit and its gifts found both ready acceptance and rapid development there. Paul spends no small part of I Corinthians attempting to restrain his Corinthian converts in this regard.

But perhaps the most important contribution of Gentile Christianity to the developing Christian movement lay in the sphere of Christology. There are in the New Testament a series of christological hymns that betray a quite remarkably uniform pattern of thought: $^{10}$

## Phil 2:6-11

Who, being in the form of God,
Did not think it robbery to be equal with God.
But emptied himself,
Taking the form of a slave.

Becoming in the likeness of men
And being found in fashion like a man,
He humbled himself,
Becoming obedient unto death.

Wherefore God highly exalted him and bestowed upon him the name above every name,

That in the name of Jesus every knee may bow in the heavens and on earth,
And every tongue confess,
"Jesus Christ is Lord."

## Col 1:15-20

Who is the image of the invisible God, first born of all creation

For in him was created everything in heavens and on earth

Everything was created through him and unto him.

Who is the beginning, the first born of the dead.

For in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell,

And through him to reconcile everything unto himself.

And he is before everything
And everything is united in him
And he is the head of the body (the church).

## I Pet 3:18-19,22

Having been put to death in the flesh,
Having been made alive in the spirit,
Having gone to the spirits in prison,
He preached.

Who is at the right hand of God,
Having gone into heaven,
Angels and authorities
and powers having been
made subject to him.

## I Tim 3:16

Was manifested in the flesh,
Was vindicated by the spirit,
Was seen by angels,

Was proclaimed among the nations,  
Was believed on in the world,  
Was taken up into glory

## Eph 2:14-16

He is our peace,

Who has made both one

And has broken down the dividing wall of the fence,

In order to make the two into one new man in him

And to reconcile both in one body to God.

## Heb 1:3

Who, being the reflection of his glory and the stamp of his essence,

Bearing everything by the word of his power,

Having made purification for sins,

Sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high.

In all these hymns we can see the pattern of a redeemer figure who descends to the earth from a higher sphere, achieves his redemptive purpose on earth, and ascends again to the higher, heavenly sphere. This pattern of thought appears to have influenced both Hellenistic Judaism and Christianity. It is found in the New Testament with quite remarkable consistency wherever there is strong contact with the Hellenistic Gentile world, not only in these hymns, but also in the gospel of John. The understanding of Jesus as a descending-ascending redeemer is one of Gentile Christianity's great contributions to the developing Christian theology.

A special problem for early Christianity was the Hellenistic Gentile tendency to think in terms of "divine men," that is, of men who particularly represented the power of a god, of men who had about them the aura of divinity. $^{11}$ We noted above that Hellenistic Jewish Christianity responded to this aspect of its environment by interpreting Jesus in this way, for example in the miracle stories now found in Mark 5 and 7. [Incidentally, Philo of Alexandria, the greatest Hellenistic Jew, responded to the same Hellenistic emphasis by interpreting Moses in a similar way in his On the Life of Moses.] In Christianity this emphasis led not only to a particular understanding of Jesus, a "divine man Christology," but also to a particular understanding of the nature of Christian discipleship, namely that Christians now share the glory of their Lord and can confidently expect to overcome in their lives what Jesus overcame in his life and death. In these traditions the death of Jesus would not have been represented as a sacrificial suffering but as a translation to an even more glorious existence. The evangelist Mark is at war with this understanding of Christology, Christian discipleship, and Christ's passion, as we shall see in a later chapter. The Hellenistic Jewish Christian church understood its

heroes as "divine men," as we can see from the portrayal of Peter and Philip in the early chapters of Acts and from such things as the note about Paul's garments possessing miraculous powers (Acts 19:12). In Corinth Paul ran into a related problem in that his opponents there, especially those he argues against in 2 Corinthians, understood a Christian apostle as one who exhibited the aura and power of a "divine man," and they claimed it of themselves and wanted Paul to demonstrate it of himself.

A most interesting aspect of Gentile Christianity, and a sharp contrast with Palestinian Christianity, is the form of its traditional material. We pointed out earlier that Palestinian Christianity traditionally used the form of sayings of Jesus and stories about him, even though the content reflected the concerns of the church and came from the church. As far as we can tell, this form was not preserved in Gentile Christianity. In I Thessalonians, for example, we are theologically very close to the Q community; the Thessalonian community, like the Q community, awaits the coming of Jesus from heaven as eschatological judge and redeemer and prepares itself for that coming. But Jesus is now expected as Lord and Son of God, not Son of Man, and the instruction is given in the form of general Christian instruction, not sayings of Jesus. True, there is enough left of the Palestinian emphasis for Paul to say that "we beseech and instruct you in the Lord Jesus," but even when the instruction is from Q material [I Thess 5:2 = Luke 12:39-40 par.] it no longer has the form of a saying of Jesus. Nor is there anywhere in the Pauline letters the slightest hint that the churches he represents and to which he writes used sayings of Jesus or stories about him as did Palestinian Christianity. When Paul quotes a "word of the Lord" (I Cor 7:10; 9:14; 11:23; 14:37) he is quoting established Christian tradition, but not in the form of a saying of Jesus. Moreover, neither his letters nor the tradition they represent show any interest in a story of Jesus other than the founding of the Lord's Supper [I Cor 11:23-26] or accounts of the passion (necessarily implied by the frequent references to the cross) and resurrection [I Cor 15:3-6]. Where Hellenistic Jewish Christianity stood on this matter we can only guess--probably somewhere in between--but between Palestinian and Gentile Christianity the form of Christian tradition as sayings of Jesus and stories about him is simply lost.

## The Apostle Paul

The apostle Paul is discussed in some detail in chapter 5, but he is so important a figure in the development of New Testament Christianity that some brief indication of his place in it must be given here. A man of the Hellenistic Jewish Christian mission, he became its outstanding representative and natural leader. Among his letters, 1 Thessalonians may be regarded as representing the typical emphases, concerns, and problems of the movement. Paul's mission took him ever deeper into the Hellenistic Gentile world, and his Corinthian correspondence must be held to represent not only the particular problems he faced in Corinth, but also the characteristic problems Christianity faced everywhere it established itself in a predominantly non-Jewish environment:

the impact of Hellenistic forms of religious enthusiasm on the Christian understanding of the possession of the Spirit; difficulties with the doctrines of the resurrection of Jesus and the future resurrection of the believer; the tendency to think of Jesus and his most immediate representatives, the apostles, as "divine men"; and so on.

A major historical event in earliest Christianity in which Paul played a leading part was the "Jerusalem Council," of which we have two accounts, one from Paul himself in Gal 2:1-10 and one in Acts 15:1-29. The problem for the historian of New Testament Christianity is that both these accounts are tendentious. Paul is fighting for his view of the faith and for the very existence of his mission in the Gentile world, and no doubt he is interpreting the event he describes. The author of the Acts of the Apostles is writing a generation later, when the issues confronting the Council were dead and a whole new set of issues had arisen in the churches. Moreover, Acts is in a tradition of historical writing that consciously put speeches on the lips of protagonists in historical events, interpreting their significance for the present reader rather than recording what had been said. The assumption has to be that Acts 15 represents a reinterpretation of the Council for a later generation and that it is addressed to the issues confronting that generation, rather than being what the modern world would recognize as a historical report.

In the light of these factors and of our general knowledge of this period of Christian history, the most probable hypothesis is that the Jerusalem Council grew out of the success of the Hellenistic Jewish Christian mission in the Gentile world. It should be emphasized that this success took everyone by surprise. Earliest Christians in general devoted their missionary activity toward their fellow Jews and expected that the Gentiles would be brought into the divine plan by a direct act of God at the End itself. But the Christian mission to the Jews was largely a failure, whereas that to the Gentiles developed into an astonishing movement of vitality and power no one could have anticipated. This created a major problem, namely, how far the new Gentile Christians should also become Jews: should it be demanded of them that they accept circumcision and Jewish dietary laws?

This crucial question was loaded with every possible kind of emotional overtone and practical consequence. Jewish Christians were no less proud of their Jewish heritage than were their fellow Jews, and even Paul himself on one occasion went so far as to circumcise one of his Gentile converts, Timothy, with his own hands (Acts 16:3). This tradition has to be historical if only because of the syntax of Gal 2:1-3, which reads as if Paul is struggling not to mention it and hoping that no one else will do so! On the other hand, the Christian mission to the Gentiles found its most fruitful field among the "God-fearers," and was there successful precisely because it did not demand acceptance of circumcision and food taboos as did Judaism, while offering all and more than Judaism itself offered. The question required the most careful handling and was in fact the occasion for a Christian "summit conference," held in Jerusalem and attended by Paul and some of his fellow workers among the Gentiles and also by the leaders of the conservatively minded church in Jerusalem. The result of this, the "Jerusalem Council," was not the decree given in Acts 15:22-29, for the subsequent history of Paul's work and

correspondence shows that he knew of no such decree, moreover, the decree reads like the kind of compromise reached in a later period when the question was not the legitimacy of the Gentile mission, but the relationship between Jews and Gentiles in well-established Christian churches. For the results of this Council we have to interpret Gal 2:7-10.

The most reasonable interpretation of this passage is that the agreement reached was that the Council was discussing the work of God in the world and no preconceived limits should be set to the nature of that work. In itself this was a major achievement and a magnificent testimony to the caliber of earliest Christianity. So Paul and his colleagues were to be free to go on working in their way in the Gentile world, and Peter and his in their way in the Jewish world. The distinction was not so much geographical as ideological, i.e., between predominantly Gentile and predominantly Jewish communities wherever they might be located. The one thing asked of Paul and his colleagues was that they should "remember the poor [in Jerusalem]." This was a request for charity--Jerusalem was an economically depressed area compared with Antioch, Ephesus, or Corinth--but more than that it was a challenge to recognition of the particular status of Jerusalem, the Holy City, and of Jerusalem Christians, these nearest to Jesus himself in birth and physical circumstances. "Poor" in the Jewish world was a synonym for "particularly pious." Paul himself took this responsibility to Jerusalem very seriously, as can be seen from his subsequent correspondence (1 Cor 16; 2 Cor 8 and 9; Rom 15:25-29).

The Jerusalem agreement left unresolved the question of table fellowship (the practice of eating together) between Jewish Christians who accepted the Jewish dietary laws and Gentile Christians who did not. Paul's account of the situation between himself and Peter in Antioch (Gal 2:11-21) indicates the problems that could and did arise. They were probably not resolved until the Jewish War of A.D. 66-70 effectively removed Palestinian Jerusalem Christianity from the scene, and the compromise now represented by Acts 15:22-29 became possible. Another problem was that not all members of either side lived up to the spirit of the agreement--by no means a unique phenomenon in human history--and so incidents arose such as the one that called forth Paul's letter to the Galatians. But generally speaking, agreement was a major achievement and made possible the subsequent advances of the Christian movement in the two decades that separated the Jerusalem Council (most probably A.D. 48) from the catastrophe of the Jewish War and destruction of Jerusalem (A.D. 66-70), which changed forever the circumstances of New Testament Christianity.

## The Impact of the Fall of Jerusalem

We have attempted to sketch some aspects of the phases through which the Christian movement must have gone before the mission and achievement of the apostle Paul. It should be emphasized that these phases were neither mutually exclusive nor chronologically successive. Any given Christian community could share to a greater or lesser extent the conservatism of the

Jerusalem church, the apocalypticism of Palestinian Christianity, the concerns of the Hellenistic Jewish mission, or the emphases of the Gentile Christian churches. Moreover, all these phases coexisted with and influenced each other until everything was changed by the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jerusalem Temple. But it is helpful to recognize the variety of stages through which the Christian movement passed, so to speak, on its way from Jerusalem to Rome, and hence to appreciate something of the variety as well as of the unity of the New Testament.

The Jews revolted against Rome in A.D. 66, beginning the war they expected God to end in their favor. But the war went the way of the Roman legions, and Jerusalem fell in A.D. 70. The war deeply affected the Christian communities. Jerusalem and Palestinian Christians were caught in the midst of the conflict. To the Romans they were Jews, but to the Jews they were suspect as Christians; so they fled Jerusalem and Palestine, going to Pella and other places in Trans Jordania, to their Christian brethren in the cities and towns of Syria and Asia Minor, and no doubt also to Alexandria and Egypt. They took with them their Jesus traditions--their traditional material in the form of sayings of Jesus or stories about him. This material must have made a tremendous impact on Christianity outside Palestine. It must have been known in part before, but the dynamism of its interaction with the developing theologies of Hellenistic Jewish Christianity and of the Gentile Christian churches was certainly in no small part responsible for the writing of the synoptic gospels, as was also the fall of Jerusalem itself.

We shall return to these points when we discuss the gospels in detail; for the moment we wish to emphasize the importance to early Christianity in general of the Jewish War and the fall of Jerusalem. Practically speaking, it meant that the Christians in the Hellenistic world no longer had to reckon with the influence of the conservatively minded church in Jerusalem. After A.D. 70 there were no influences like those that Paul wrestled with in his letter to the Galatians and no occasion for an altercation like the one he had with Peter in Antioch (Gal 2:11-21). Also, with the effective disappearance of Jerusalem Christianity, and indeed of Palestinian Christianity generally, together with the effects of the sheer passage of time, the three phases of the Christian movement we have been distinguishing thus far simply ceased to exist. After A.D. 70 there was in effect only a Hellenistic Gentile Christianity, which in any one place might have a greater or lesser concern for or with the Judaism from which it was ultimately descended.

## The Middle Period of New Testament Christianity

The New Testament texts relate themselves only indirectly or theologically to the events of their historical world, mostly because New Testament Christians awaited the imminent end of that world. But there is enough indirect and theological relationship in the texts for us to be able to say something about what may be described as the middle period of New Testament history, the twenty-five years or so that followed the fall of Jerusalem.

Theologically speaking, the period was characterized in the main by the necessity for coming to terms with the catastrophe of A.D. 70 and the delay of the parousia, by the continuing influence of the apostle Paul, and by the development of Johannine Christianity, associated now with the gospel and letters of John, the "Johannine corpus." Furthermore, in this period the church became more conscious of being a distinct entity with a history in the world and hence with a need to normalize her relations with both Hellenism and Judaism. But before going further we should note that the period began and ended with a resurgence of Christian apocalyptic.

## The resurgence of Christian apocalyptic

We have said that Christianity began as an apocalyptic sect within Judaism. The earliest Christians awaited the imminent end of the world, which would take the form of the return of Jesus as eschatological judge and redeemer. With the movement into the Gentile world and with the sheer passage of time and the failure of the expected events to occur, other emphases developed. But apocalyptic thinking, thinking of a world about to end and be replaced by a different world, always tended to flare up in response to a crisis, a tendency that has continued throughout Christian history. In the New Testament period one such crisis was the Jewish War. To Christians as well as to Jews it seemed to be the beginning of the End, the beginning of the war that God would terminate by direct intervention in human history. There was a resurgence of apocalyptic expectation among Christians and Jews, and its literary monument in the New Testament is the gospel of Mark. In our later discussion we shall argue that in many respects this gospel is an apocalypse, and it is certainly a product of the resurgence of apocalyptic expectation occasioned by the Jewish War.

The persecution of the church could also have strengthened apocalyptic expectations. It could have led to the belief that the end of history as known was at hand and that God was about to change everything; it was simply a question of hanging on. One such persecution in the New Testament period was under the Roman emperor Domitian (A.D. 81-96), which was most probably the occasion for writing the one completely apocalyptic work in the New Testament, the book of Revelation.

## Coming to terms with the fall of Jerusalem and the delay of the parousia

As we have said, two major factors in the development of New Testament Christianity were the fall of Jerusalem and destruction of its Temple (which should not have happened but did) and the delay of the parousia, the coming of Jesus from heaven as eschatological judge and redeemer (which should have happened but did not). Much of the literature now in the New Testament attempts directly to come to terms with these elements in early Christian

history. In what we are describing as the "middle period" of New Testament history, there came the gospel of Matthew, the two-volume gospel of Luke and Acts of the Apostles, and the letter to the Hebrews. The gospel of Matthew sees the ministry of Jesus as the new Sacred Time, the fulfillment of the hopes of Judaism, so that Jerusalem is no longer necessary to the Christian. The parousia is still to be expected, but in the meantime there is work to be done in the world. Luke-Acts sees Jerusalem as the place that rejected Jesus and so has been itself rejected. The time of Jesus is the new Sacred Time, and while Christians are still to expect the parousia, they have also to settle down to the long haul of history wherein they must witness. Hebrews sees all that was good in Judaism and the Jerusalem Temple having been superseded by Jesus.

## The continuing influence of the apostle Paul

An important aspect of Paul's work was that he trained men to work with and after him in the Gentile Christian churches. Though we have no direct reference to this training in the New Testament itself, it would have been a natural thing to do [jewish rabbis regularly trained disciples, as tradition has it that Paul himself wgs trained by Gamaliel, Acts 22:3], and his letters and the narrative of Acts are studded with references to "fellow workers" or "helpers." But the real evidence for the existence of a Pauline "school" are the deutero-Pauline letters, written in the name of Paul and close to his thinking yet sufficiently different from the genuine letters to allow us to conclude they were not written by the apostle himself. These letters--2 Thessalonians, Colossians, Ephesians--all come from what we are calling the 'middle period' of New Testament Christianity. Whereas 2 Thessalonians attempts to maintain the earlier hope for the parousia, Colossians and Ephesians represent the church developing her doctrines and settling down to the problems and opportunities of her ongoing life in the Gentile world. They also represent the continuing influence of the apostle a generation after his death in a world where Jerusalem and the Jerusalem church were no longer to be reckoned with but in which what was later to be called Gnosticism was developing as a major problem.

## The development of Johannine Christianity

The gospel and letters of John represent a distinct and distinctive understanding of Christian faith. To move from the synoptic gospels to John's gospel is to move from one world to another, as it is to move from Paul's letters to these letters. Here the Christian faith comes to terms with the Hellenistic world as thoroughly and successfully as did the apostle Paul [but in a different way], and "Christianity according to St. John" became a major influence on the Christian piety of subsequent centuries. The famous Anglican archbishop William Temple confessed that he felt at home in the Johannine corpus as he did nowhere else in the New Testament, and in this he is representative of

countless Christians. This understanding of the faith was hammered out somewhere in Syria during the middle period of the New Testament, most probably by a strong leader with a group of close followers--a Johannine school to which we owe the Johannine corpus, as we owe the Pauline corpus to a Pauline school. Whether the leader's name was John does not matter, what matters is that the "Johannine" understanding of the Christian faith is a major achievement of the New Testament period.

## The Final Period: The New Testament Church on the Way to Becoming an Institution

The New Testament church began as an apocalyptic sect within Judaism, expecting the imminent end of the world. But by the end of the New Testament period it was on the way to becoming an institution with a credal basis, a distinctive literature, and a fixed organizational structure. The full establishment of these things--a creed, a canon, and an episcopate--did not come until later, but the movement toward them is evident in the final stages of the New Testament history and literature, especially in the Pastoral Epistles (1 and 2 Timothy and Titus). In these letters we have a third-generation Paulinist writing in the name of the illustrious apostle, but the language and thought are those of the church at the beginning of the second century. Sayings are worthy of acceptance if they are "faithful" [1 Tim 1:15, RSV says, "sure"], we are on the way to a creed. The "office of a bishop" is "a noble task" [1 Tim 3:1], we are on the way to the episcopate. The church is "the pillar and the bulwark of the truth" [1 Tim 3:15], we are on the way to the church as an institution. An equally pseudonymous letter written in the name of an illustrious apostle, 2 Peter, speaks of the letters of Paul as a collection and equates them with "the other scriptures" [2 Pet 3:16], and we are on the way to the New Testament canon.

The remainder of the literature in the New Testament belongs to this last period. First Peter, again pseudonymous, is most probably a developed baptismal homily from the end of the first or the beginning of the second century, reflecting the situation of the church under persecution. James' letter, also pseudonymous, is a Christian moral homily in a style familiar to Hellenism and Hellenistic Judaism, and its view of faith as the acceptance of a doctrinal proposition (Jas 2:18-19) is characteristic of the developing institutionalization of Christianity. The letter of Jude polemicizes against heretics not by setting out a positive theological standpoint in opposition to the heresy, but simply by appealing to the authority of tradition.

All these texts represent, therefore, the church on the way to becoming an institution with a creed, a canon, and an episcopate: needing and using baptismal and moral homilies, viewing faith as the acceptance of doctrinal propositions, and appealing to an authoritative tradition against what is considered heresy. After the dynamism of Paul, John, or the synoptic evangelists, it is something of an anticlimax, but the Christian faith could not have survived through the centuries except as the depository of an

institutionalized organization, and the preservation of the New Testament as a set of texts meant that the potential influence of the more dynamic moments was always there. That dynamism has been frequently active, sometimes to the embarrassment of the institution, as when Martin Luther began to read the letters of Paul. This period of New Testament Christianity is the period of "emergent Catholicism," and its literature is the "literature of emergent Catholicism." We use emergent and Catholicism because the features characteristic of the Catholic church down into the Middle Ages began to emerge in this period.

## FURTHER READING

As far as the present writer is aware, this chapter represents the first attempt at a systematic presentation of a theological history of earliest Christianity as it appears in the light of form and redaction criticism. Much of it is built on the author's own researches and those of his students, so there can be no "further reading" for the chapter as a whole. However, there is good material available for various parts of it.

The idea of distinguishing various phases in pre-Pauline Christianity goes back essentially to W. Bousset, who in his Kyrios Christos (1970; German original 1913) distinguished between early Palestinian and early Gentile Christianity. It was taken up by Bultmann, who in his Theology of the New Testament distinguished between "the earliest church" and "the Hellenistic church aside from Paul," and Conzelmann, in his History of Primitive Christianity, follows Bultmann in this regard. It has been a particular feature of recent work on New Testament Christology and is exemplified in Fuller's The Foundation of New Testament Christology as a distinction between "the earliest church," "the Hellenistic Jewish mission," and "the Hellenistic Gentile mission." The distinctions made in our chapter are a deliberate modification of these.

Bruce, New Testament History, is a full-scale treatment and a mine of information on the historical background of New Testament Christianity; it is the best source for such information that is presently available. But the author has a view of the historical trustworthiness of the New Testament narrative and of early Christian tradition that most New Testament scholars would not share.

Information on Palestinian Judaism itself is readily available:

PCB, pp. 693-98, "The Development of Judaism in the Greek and Roman Periods" (M. Black).  
JBC, pp. 535-60, "Apocrypha, Dead Sea Scrolls, Other Jewish Literature" (R. E. Brown).  
JBC, pp. 692-702, "A History of Israel: From Pompey to Bar Cochba" [J. A. Fitzmeyer].  
Foerster, From the Exile to Christ.

Simon, Jewish Sects at the Time of Jesus.

See also the relevant articles in IDB.

Bultmann, Theology of the New Testament, vol. 1, pp. 33-62, discusses "The Kerygma of the Earliest Church," by which he means what we are calling Palestinian Jewish Christianity. Käsemann, New Testament Questions of Today, pp. 82-107, "The Beginnings of Christian Theology," and pp. 108-37, "On the Subject of Primitive Christian Apocalyptic," discusses the apocalyptic element in Palestinian Jewish Christianity. Fuller, Foundations of New Testament Christology, pp. 142-74, discusses the Christology of Palestinian Jewish Christianity (the attentive reader will note differences of opinion between Fuller and the present writer, especially in the matter of the origin of the Son of Man in the New Testament).

Information on Hellenistic Judaism is readily available:

PCB, pp. 686-92, "The Jewish State in the Hellenistic World" (W. D. Davies).

Tarn and Griffith, Hellenistic Civilization, pp. 210-38.

The present writer knows of no systematic discussion of Hellenistic Jewish Mission Christianity apart from the discussion of its Christology by Fuller, Foundations of New Testament Christology, pp. 182-202, "The Hellenistic Jewish Mission." Bultmann, Theology of the New Testament, does not distinguish it as a separate phase.

On Hellenism itself, see:

PCB, pp. 712-17, "Pagan Religion at the Coming of Christianity" (M. Wilson).

Bultmann, Primitive Christianity in its Contemporary Setting, pp. 135-74.

Tarn and Griffith, Hellenistic Civilization.

Grant, Hellenistic Religions. Texts in translation with an introduction.

On Gentile Christianity, see:

Bultmann, Theology of the New Testament, vol. 1, pp. 63-184, "The Kerygma of the Hellenistic Church Aside from Paul."

Fuller, Foundations of New Testament Christology, pp. 203-42.

Nock, Early Gentile Christianity and Its Gentile Background.

On the christological hymns, see Sanders, The New Testament Christological Hymns: Their Historical Religious Background, which has full references to earlier literature.

Other treatments of New Testament Christianity after the fall of Jerusalem are Brandon, The Fall of Jerusalem and the Christian Church, and Gaston, No

Stone upon Another. The discussion we have offered of this subject is independent of both of these.

We have spoken of "the New Testament church on the way to becoming an institution." This is the present writer's way of talking about what Käsemann calls Frühkatholizismus, "early (or "emergent") Catholicism." See especially:

Käsemann, Essays on New Testament Themes, pp. 63-107, "Ministry and Community in the New Testament."

\_\_\_\_, New Testament Questions of Today, pp. 236-51, "Paul and Early Catholicism."
