Manly to St. Leonards, above the harbour bridge on the North Shore, took a four-station electric train ride to Lindfield, then another bus to Bradford Park, to look for golf balls. One went ahead of the other, along a river bank walkway leading to the golf course, and saw a man lying on his stomach. He dismissed him as a 'hobo who had been drinking and was sleeping it off'. He looked more closely at the form, and saw that the man's face was blue. He rejoined his mate on the search for golf balls, mentioned the 'hobo' he had seen, and when he returned along the track an hour later he looked at the man again. He noticed the face was almost purple, and told a shopkeeper in the vicinity: 'Looks like someone over there's dead.'

The shopkeeper confirmed the boy's fears and telephoned the police. A sergeant who went to the body found a suit was draped neatly over it -- so neatly that at first sight the man appeared fully dressed. The man was wearing a white shirt over which was draped a piece of carpet about 27 in. by 36 in. There were no underpants; the collar was undone, the tie loosened.

Rigor mortis was well advanced. There was no mark to suggest cause of death. A small amount of vomit was a foot away from the head. Under a nearby tree the policeman found a pair of women's cotton interlock panties. Back at the body, in a wallet, he found documents referring to Dr. Gilbert Stanley Bogle, Warragul Road, Turramurra.

The sergeant restored the clothing to the body as he found it, and used radio to call other police. A detective removed the clothing again, to obtain information in the wallet, and went off to follow up leads to identification. A motor-cycle policeman, attracted by the radio call, was instructed to search the river bank south of the man's body. He dropped down the bank, about 15 yards from the body, and in a thick patch of scrub, under some cardboard cartons, saw part of a human leg. The sergeant who was the first to the scene and the constable lifted the cartons and found the body of a woman. The cartons were restored and

other police called to the river bank. By about 1.30 p.m. the C.I.B. men had completed their work and the bodies were removed to a morgue for post-mortem examinations. A detective went to the home of Mrs. Bogle to tell her that her husband was dead.

Other police sought out the host and hostess of a party given the night before which was attended by Gilbert Bogle. Their first lead to the identity of the woman came from the party host, Kenneth Nash, who was asked when Bogle left the party and who was with him. He thought it would have been about 4.30 a.m., and that Mrs. Margaret Chandler, wife of Geoffrey Chandler, who also attended the party, was with Bogle.

Police sought Geoffrey Chandler to establish that the body on the river bank was that of his wife. Chandler told them that he had left the party ahead of his wife who, he understood, was being escorted home by Bogle. The arrangement was made earlier in the evening when Mrs. Chandler thought Chandler had left without her. Margaret Chandler's husband was employed by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, and knew Bogle and Nash through this connection.

From the evidence at the inquest it seems clear that Bogle and Mrs. Chandler did not become acquainted until 21 December, less than a fortnight before their bodies were found together. For the New Year's Party at their home at Waratah Street, a quiet, suburban area on Sydney's North Shore, Mr. and Mrs. Nash sent out formal invitations, and altogether twenty persons received and accepted these. The party was due to commence at 9 p.m. and at about that time, and for an hour or so thereafter, the invited guests began arriving at the Nash home. Most of them were either professional or business people, all of some importance, and all were about forty years of age.

To this party Dr. Bogle and his wife had been invited, but

Bogle said his wife had a young baby and she sought to be excused. The host and hostess told Dr. Bogle they would be quite happy if he were to come alone. He arrived at the Nash home somewhere about nine or ten o'clock. Shortly after he arrived Mr. and Mrs. Chandler came in.

It was said by the Coroner, and affirmed by those who were there, that the amount drunk in the course of the evening was modest. I myself am not sure what this term means in relation to a New Year's party; and one of the features of the case which I find least satisfactory is that relating to the amount the guests had to drink in the course of the evening, which lasted from nine or ten o'clock till three-thirty or four in the morning, when guests began to disperse.

It is a matter of common knowledge to all pathologists who have been involved in cases where drink has led to tragedy that observations made by persons at a party as to how much was drunk are notoriously inaccurate. There is a tendency when tragedy intervenes to underplay the element of alcohol, to understate the amount that was drunk. In any case people who are themselves drinking have, by reason of the alcohol they have taken, been rendered less capable of forming an assessment, or even having a recollection of what they themselves have had to drink or how much those who were present had to drink. It has been my practice in cases of this sort to disregard completely, or very greatly discount, assessments made of what amount was drunk, or what was the condition of the people attending.

At about midnight Chandler left the party. Chandler records, and he gave it in evidence at the inquest, that he left the party to purchase cigarettes. He did in fact purchase cigarettes, after driving his car some distance before finding a shop that was open, and then went on to another party, at Balmain, where about 100 people were present, including a young woman, Miss Pat Logan, with whom Chandler for some time had been on very friendly terms.

Chandler had a key to the flat where she lived alone. His account and her account of their association on that evening was that after they had left the party at Balmain, he took Miss Logan to her home, went in and remained with her about half an hour, then rejoined his wife and the other guests at the Nash home. There, after midnight, and also about 2 a.m. supper was served. At about four o'clock or shortly before some of the guests thought it was time to go. At this time Mrs. Chandler was in conversation with Dr. Bogle.

Mr. Chandler said that from what his wife had told him--and I thought that this was a strange feature of the case--she had been rather taken by Bogle. Indeed she told her husband, or he said that she told him, he would be rather an exciting person to sleep with. This was the only suggestion that prior to the events of the early hours of New Year's Day there had been any association or attraction between these two.

Some sort of conversation or discussion took place between Chandler and his wife and Bogle, and it was rather suggested by Chandler that perhaps Bogle would like to take his--Chandler's--wife home. At any rate the matter was left in some uncertainty. Chandler said he went out to where his car was in front of the house, and sat in it for a sufficient time to satisfy himself that his wife had no intention of accompanying him home.

He thereupon set out for his mother-in-law's house, where his children were, to bring them home; but before doing this he went again, at five o'clock in the morning, to the flat of Miss Logan. She was asleep. He wakened her and invited her to go with him to get the children, and help him with the children in bringing them home. Chandler and the girl went to the home of Chandler's mother-in-law, got there at 5.30 a.m., found her in the kitchen, had some conversation and later left, bringing the children back to Chandler's home.

Bogle and Mrs. Chandler left the party some time after 4 a.m., and it is believed they drove away from the Nash home together.

They went to a spot on Lane Cove river called Fuller's Bridge, about three miles from the Nash home. Bogle's car was found correctly parked, with the ignition key under the visor in a position where Bogle commonly left it--nothing to indicate that anyone had in any way interfered with the car. There were no signs of violence about the car, there was no blood in the car or about the car, no sign of scuffling or a struggle.

It is a most unfortunate circumstance that no medical officer was able to make an examination of the bodies as they were found. No observations were made which could with accuracy determine how long the bodies had been dead. There is no record of the temperatures of the bodies having been taken and, indeed, as I understand the situation, it was not until another 24 hours had elapsed that any medical officer saw the bodies at all. For some reason which is not quite clear the examination of the bodies did not commence until 1.30 p.m. on 2 January, by which time no observations as to the temperatures of the bodies could have been of any value, and one wonders whether a different view of the matter may have been taken had the examination of the bodies at the site of the deaths, or the post-mortem examinations, been made at an earlier stage.

Scientific investigation of these deaths was in the hands of the Director of the New South Wales Division of Forensic Medicine, a division of the Department of Health in New South Wales, Dr. John Laing, assisted by the Government Analyst, Mr. E. S. Ogg. The police continued their inquiries for a considerable time without being able to reach any conclusion as to the cause of death. It seemed clear that whatever had caused the deaths of these two people operated on their bodies over about the same length of time, and that death must have occurred almost simultaneously. Neither of the bodies showed any manifestation of organic disease.

In my view the appearances of the bodies were certainly consistent with acute heart failure, and I can find nothing in

the recorded findings at the post-mortem examinations which excludes the possibility that both of these persons died an acute asphyxial death. Whatever suspicions there may have been in the first instance about poisoning by strychnine or some other violent poison, the subsequent analysis excluded any of the common poisons. In my view the investigations that were made did not exclude a poison which is one of the commonest known to human beings--alcohol, but I can find nothing in the recorded reports to indicate what quantity of alcohol was in the body of Bogle and Mrs. Chandler.

I would have thought that deaths that followed attendance at a New Year's party at which alcohol was drunk in an amount that we can only guess at would have included an investigation of the amount of alcohol measured by milligrams per 100 mls. in the blood and urine. Nowhere can I find a record that this was done. In the reported evidence of Dr. Laing it is observed that the cause of death appeared to be identical in both cases; acute cardiac failure associated with anoxia and pulmonary oedema. In my view both these findings are completely consistent with death from asphyxia associated with alcoholic intoxication.

Dr. Laing in his evidence disposed of some of the wilder theories which had been advanced as a cause of death. High frequency sound waves, sedatives, carbon monoxide; indeed he mentions alcohol, with the surprising statement that 'no alcohol, sedatives, or monoxide were found'. Dr. Laing did not anywhere say what quantity of alcohol there was in the body. If he says there was no alcohol at all then this was clearly an error on the part of either the doctor for not taking specimens or of the analyst for failing to recognise the presence of alcohol. There would certainly have been measurable and identifiable amounts of alcohol in the bodies. Failure of the doctor and the analyst to record the amount of alcohol in the body leaves me with the ineradicable impression that through some mischance or

oversight the estimation of alcohol in the bodies had been omitted.

To pursue this point it is necessary to form an opinion as to the purpose of the visit of these two to the river bank. It is clear that some sort of affection or attraction had developed between the two. The removal of the clothes from the bodies could have been a voluntary act preparatory to intercourse. That the male party did not succeed in what he set out to do may well have been an indication that he was too much under the influence of alcohol. The very posture that would be taken up by people under these circumstances is one that could by some mishap or chance movement lead to a state in which one would asphyxiate the other by sheer contact. If indeed one became unconscious from the onset of asphyxia it could lead to the asphyxiation of the other party.

If that were so, how was it that the bodies were found apart, separated by a distance of at least fifteen yards? I feel that when the bodies were first found dead they were lying together; that they were both dead and partly naked. Such a discovery would have struck consternation into the mind of the observer, whether that observer was a complete stranger or whether it was somebody who knew them. I don't exclude the possibility that the bodies were found in the first instance by either somebody who knew them both, and knew that they had been at the party, or by some complete stranger, who was so disturbed by what he saw that he changed the relative positions of the bodies to reduce the scene to something more bearable.

I don't believe the teenagers were capable of doing this; but any person who knew the couple or who was at the party may have felt so strongly. It may have been an act based on a charitable desire to leave a situation less shameful than it was in the first instance.

Of this I am certain: that whatever may have been the cause of the deaths of these two people, the same agent caused both

their deaths. I believe their deaths occurred at about the same time, and I have indicated what, in my opinion, was the most probable cause of their deaths. I am certain that after death their bodies were moved by some person or persons and put in the positions in which they were ultimately found by the boy and the constable.

6

## The girl in the scarf

IT WAS a cold wet mid-winter Sunday afternoon, and I was sitting at home by my fire when the police phoned. They arranged to pick me up in thirty minutes. We drove from the high hills of Khandallah suburb through Wellington to one of the eastern suburbs, Hataitai, to a dreary tip which, years later, was to become Hataitai Park. A party of police met me, and I was shown down a cliff to where the officer-in-charge, Detective-Inspector R. Ward was standing. His face showed fatigue, but also relief; the search the police had completed in this miserable weather must have been for him a great responsibility. In my presence an exhumation--it can be called that--was completed. I saw then that the police had recovered the body of a girl, that she was lying face downwards in a strange knee-chest attitude. Over the lower part of her back and buttocks was a sack--not unlike the many hundreds of cement sacks that lay about various parts of this tip. In the area where the body was covered up a rough sort of kerb, as though to form an outer wall of a grave, was formed by large rocks. It appeared that some sort of a shallow grave or impression had been made on the ground, with an arrangement of rocks on the lower side to keep the hole from sliding away. All that had been required, if the body was covered, was to prevent it from moving; then, in a few days, it would be completely covered by tons of soil.

The body was removed to the Wellington city mortuary where I examined it that afternoon. The clothes were muddy, but when the clothing and the mud were removed from the surface of the

body I could see that there were no signs of decomposition. It appeared as though it may have been lying where it was found for something like a fortnight, in conditions which were almost equivalent to storage of a body in a refrigerator.

There were no obvious signs of violence on the surface. The abdomen was swollen from pregnancy. There were no marks on the hands or legs or trunk. A striking external attachment was a scarf--a long scarf, which was over the eyes and upper part of the face. It twice circled the head, and was fastened with a safety pin over the right ear. I removed the scarf, and saw that over the part that covered the mouth the scarf was stained with vomited material, but no blood.

For the police there was no mystery about the girl's identity. They had been searching the tip almost all of that week in July 1931, for the body of Phyllis Avis Symons, 17, who had quarrelled with her parents and left them. Her parents had gone to the police after a man delivered to them a note--apparently a suicide message--found under a mattress in a deserted rooming house in Adelaide Road, Wellington, an inner industrial area only about a mile from where the body was found.

The man who delivered the note obtained it from another who was acquainted with Phyllis and a man she had been living with in the house in Adelaide Road--a relief worker named George Coats. The police feared for the safety of Phyllis Symons, and started their digging after they learned that Coats had been employed on the filling of a gully at Hataitai, that he had been sacked, and that he had returned there and used a shovel about the time Phyllis left the Adelaide Road house for the last time.

Coats, 33, a widower with six children, all of whom were in the care of an orphanage, was out of regular work and employed on relief work. In the course of this work he was employed on road works near the home of George H. Symons, a motor body builder, who lived with his wife and family at 45 Mortimer Terrace on the city's south-west hills. During the time he was

working near the Symons home Coats was frequently given tea, or tea was made for him and his fellow workers, by some members of the Symons family.

Frequently Phyllis either made the tea for him or brought out tea to him and his workmates. During this time Coats, who was a good deal older than this girl, became very friendly with her and began to take her out. This was done without the consent of the girl's mother and very much against her wish. Once when she heard Coats address her daughter by her Christian name she objected and warned the girl not to become familiar with these men.

From what was told the police by the mother, Mary Symons, and other members of the family it seems the girl was rather backward, that she was readily impressed by notice from another person. At any rate this relationship between Coats and the girl continued to develop, and in March the girl quarrelled with her mother and left home. The mother did not know it but Phyllis was pregnant, and she went to live with Coats in an upstairs room in a plain two-storey wooden house in Newtown. There was much poverty in New Zealand at the time, and the predicament of the couple may well be imagined; the girl was out of the job she had had in a soda water factory, and Coats, on relief work, was being pursued for the maintenance of his six children.

When Phyllis Symons was reported missing by her parents, and the trail found its way to Coats, the police turned their attention to the earthworks at Hataitai after studying Coats' behaviour while working there. They had learned that Coats was on the job when it had been found that the best method of disposing of a dog killed on a road nearby was to dig it into the gully which was being filled in. Coats had since lost his job at the gully, and police had learned that before departing he had asked for a shovel to be left out, and he had been seen back there, digging.

but denied that he had hit her. He said he had gone to Hataitai with the girl to discuss their future. They were not at the bottom of the tip at this stage--they were on a flat surface at the top of it, where there was a level area and where there was an opportunity for them to sit down. They sat and talked for a while about their unfortunate position, and the girl then excused herself and went in the direction of the face of the tip to relieve herself. When she was gone for some time he became uneasy about her and went to look for her, and found her at the bottom of the tip. His impression was that she must have thrown herself over.

Wrapped around her head was a scarf. Beside where she lay was a rather large rock, and Coats assumed, he said, that in falling she must have struck her head against this rock. He was in the position of having a body on his hands and thought he should dispose of it. He was fortunate enough to find a shovel nearby, and he then buried the girl as she was afterwards found. He said he believed that when he put her there she was dead.

The story told by Coats was supported by evidence given by three distinguished medical men, all of them close friends of mine. One was a well-known surgeon in Wellington, Sir Donald McGavin, the second a practising surgeon and a man of great experience, Dr. S. D. Rhind, and the third was Dr. D. Macdonald Wilson, a former medical superintendent of the Wellington Hospital. The gist of their evidence was that if a person was projected from a height and fell in a certain way against a rock, injuries severe as Phyllis Symons had could result.

Sir Donald McGavin offered the explanation that if the girl had fallen down the tip and struck her head on a projection, this could account for the injury to the temple. As to the injuries to the back of the neck, he queried my explanation of these as being due to applied violence: McGavin illustrated with a doll he had brought into Court that a fall could have produced injuries known to surgeons as 'traction', that this was supported
