smile flashed at the woman it suddenly didn't seem like such a wasted evening after all. The trip through London had been fun, the woman was tired and glad not to have to navigate, her husband's firm would refund the fares, it was a beautiful night, those stars, that moon . . . Sadie's smile was fading.

The woman turned to her husband 'No need for her to shell out,' she said. 'You'll get this on the firm.'

The cab returned via Wandsworth and the cabbie must have caught some of the smile for he drove right into Bev's estate.

'Not a nice neighbourhood,' he said. 'Wouldn't want you roaming the streets.'

'No,' Sadie murmured and walked past the rubbish chute to the stairs. She held the rail and was incredibly and exhaustively sick, trod gently up to the first floor and knocked at Bev's door.

'Bev,' she called through the letter-box, hardly louder than a whisper, but Bev was used to listening for Claire.

'Who is it?' she called.

'Me,' said Sadie and fell into her arms.

'Sadie, sweetheart, what a surprise. Come in, let me take your rucksack off.'

Quercus had finished.

'We take your point,' said the Archangelica, 'but we disagree.'

'You see,' said Cianthus, 'Sadie is not the pathetic little wimp you imagine, nor is she without gifts of her own.'

'Oh yeah,' scoffed Quercus, 'she can hold her breath to a thousand, has double-jointed thumbs, can guess the suit of the next playing card with more than 65 percent accuracy?'

'You weren't watching were you? Twice already, two times . . .'

'I know what twice means.'

'Two times she has made use of this gift unaware of doing more than getting what she wanted.'

'You mean you knew her already? Why wasn't I told?'

'It's all in the Minutes,' said Cianthus.

'Ahem,' the Archangelica cleared its collective throat, 'we have decided that you willingly and directly intervened in the lives of the Huwomen, that you are more concerned with their problems than with your own and we therefore suggest you live amongst them.'

'We respect your concern for them,' added Cianthus, 'and we feel a spell on Earth will empower you to involve yourselves more directly without the awkward superiority endowed you by virtue of your Bodhead.'

'Is there anything more you want to say before you go?'

'I know you all have other things to do now,' said Melaleuca, 'but there's more to say, it isn't over yet.'

'More to say . . .'

'It isn't over yet . . .'

'There's some fresh evidence . . .'

'Conversations never end . . .'

'I think you ought to follow the story through,' said Melaleuca. 'I think you should see what happened next.'

'But why?' protested the Bonsais. 'You intervened. That the Huwoman in question was too wise to heed the intervention is in itself irrelevant.'

'One does not enquire into the fate of certain letters; one notes their theft and hopes the owner kept a copy. Whether they are themselves useful or worth the trouble caused is a subject of mere conjecture over a light loam. The consequence is not the point.'

'A young man picks up a brick and throws it. Does one not stop to ask: whom did he hit? It is not wrong in itself to throw. The consequence is all.'

'Young men? Bricks? Certain documents? Thieves?'

'It is not enough to intervene,' said Melaleuca. 'Some change must occur because of it. You must wait and see if the lives of those three women altered one iota because Quercus reached out and made that coin tails.'

'Knowing only too well the danger of understanding too much too clearly, that awful omniscient comprehension which binds your stem and disarms you, causing you in your sympathy to forget yourself, causing you to suspend judgement, empty-headed as dry straw, yet we did try to see it your way . . .'

'But Sadie's as much a part of my experience as the wind or the rain,' protested Quercus.

'We took your point,' continued the Archangelica, 'and we disagreed.'

'A fair trial.'

'A fair fight.'

'A bad loser.'

'It matters so much to you to be fair to us?' asked Melaleuca.

'We would not wish to feel we'd been unkind.'

'Then watch on.'

'Till when? When does it end?'

'Ah,' said Hakea pensively. 'Perhaps we cannot speak of beginnings or endings but only of clusters of heightened or lessened activity.'

'There is always fresh evidence.'

'Conversations never end.'

Unaware of this Boddly fixation the three women came and went, pursuing trifles and pettiness in the full insignificance of their lives.

'I think we should remember how this started,' said Buddleia from Polly's back garden, now so comfortably settled her removal would seriously threaten the ecosystem. 'In the beginning . . .'

'So there was a beginning . . .'

'She's been there all this time . . .'

'A mindslip . . .'

'An oversight . . .'

'A missing link . . .'

'You asked me certain questions, I was to exercise discretion, I wasn't to be pushy, I was to wait till I was told. "Go on now, Buddleia", said your Bodships, "find out why this women sins. Tell us why her friend left while another has troubles of her own. Explain her desertion of her studies, her mother's faith in the Highway Code. Tell us why she irons the sheets and why the stair carpet is blue."

'Are these questions answered?'

'Some fully.'

'Some not at all.'

'I do not yet know why her friend left,' said Buddleia. 'Surely we must postpone our decision till our own purpose is accomplished?'

There was a silence.

'So be it,' decreed the Archangelica. 'As we put the wheels in motion we will wait till the tale is told.'

## 6

## Hiccups

'Hello? Sadie?' said Polly. 'I was wondering are you still interested? I mean, would you like to move in?'

'Really, Polly, really?' said Sadie. 'Oh, I was sure you'd say no. I couldn't see it in colour at all.'

'Move in? Oh that's wonderful,' shrieked Kim forgetting that her housemates might be listening. 'Oh Polly, I can't tell you what a relief.'

Polly looked at the living-room furniture and thought maybe it wouldn't feel so big if there were more people to share it.

Kim moved in with a van; Sadie moved in with a rucksack. There were hiccups.

'Tell me now,' said Polly, 'what is it you do?'

'Nothing,' said Sadie. 'And you?'

'I'm er, working on a PhD.'

'Wow,' said Kim. 'A real one?'

'Well it's still rather theoretical. I mean, I haven't actually written anything yet.'

'Ah,' nodded Kim wisely, 'I'm a bus conductor myself. So if one of you wants to be my spouse I can get you a free pass.'

'Mmm,' said Sadie, 'I never pay anyway.'

And it seemed then to each that she had nothing in common with the others.

Then there was breakfast. Sadie usually slept through it which left Kim and Polly alone together. When Kim neglected to clean the butter knife before plunging it in the marmalade, Polly would ask was that what she did at home. Kim would reply: yes, when she was treated like a lodger. Polly would ask what she meant by that and Kim would say Polly still made all major decisions about the running of the house and seemed

incapable of communal living.

'You expect us to share bills equally when we don't earn the same money,' Kim would say.

'But if we did it according to income, you'd end up paying most,' Polly would protest.

'Oh it's not just money,' Kim would spit. 'You get the best room in the house and the phone extension's just outside your door so you can have private conversations while me and Sadie have to do it in the corridor.'

'I spend more time at home than either of you and I'm forever taking messages. Some days I can't sit down but the phone rings.'

'And all the furniture in the house is yours. Can't get to the bath tub without falling over a heavy oak chest,' Kim raged.

'You could try switching the light on,' suggested Polly drily.

'And the food you buy. When it's your turn to do Sainsbury's you get real butter, meat, all the most expensive stuff.'

'Well, Sadie likes butter and I haven't noticed you refuse a chicken dinner.'

'And then you insist on brown rice, which means going all the way into Brixton, because our bodies need the roughage. You're so fucking contradictory.'

'What a dear little Puritan,' Polly would tease. 'Like everything hunky-tanky, would you?'

'You can't say that, Polly,' Kim would object. 'I think we should talk about it.'

Soon the arguments went underground to resurface as unspoken hostility and obsessive interest in each other's eating habits.

Every morning she pours herself a second cup of tea, Polly would say to herself. She never finishes it. It always goes cold, one or other of us knocks it over and I clear it up. Kim drinking tea was not a pretty sight. She would pick up the cup in both hands and proceed to slurp, yes slurp down the contents. Polly had tried doing the same herself to show how annoying it was but Kim didn't even seem to notice.

Kim eating a full breakfast, however, was far worse. More scope. First she would flood her muesli with milk (and they only got two pints a day) then she would crunch it with her mouth open: champ, champ, champ like a horse. When she swallowed it made little gurgling noises in her throat. Was she under the

mistaken impression that she sounded sweet? Polly yearned to stretch across the table and place a light hand under Kim's chin to encourage her to close it while she ate. Sometimes Kim would think of something to say just after she'd filled her mouth and, being too impatient to wait until she'd finished, would spray it all over the place. Polly would wipe wet hazel-nut sludge off her cheeks and wish it wasn't too late to teach Kim table manners.

Kim hated Polly. Worse even than she hated her driver and that was saying something. He would pull away from bus stops before all the passengers were on board and old women, children and push-chairs would stumble over each other and she would have to ring the emergency bell as if it had all been her fault. Her driver was simply oblivious to all other concerns save his own desire to return to the garage and play poker. A single-mindedness which in other spheres might have been commendable. But Polly, Kim was convinced, was a polar bear. They had blue tongues and were motivated by pure malice: killed for the love of killing, leaving their prey untasted on the ice.

Under Polly's gaze breakfast was torture. Polly drank a refined cup of black coffee, or, sometimes, only a glass of cold water: 'Must cut down on artificial stimulants . . .' but she took a perverse pleasure in watching Kim eat. Kim would search for something to say to draw Polly's attention away, begin to speak but, overcome with nerves, would end up gabbling incomprehensibly into her bowl. What's more, Polly was always throwing Kim's tea away on the grounds that she never drank it. 'Don't get a chance. You whisk it away too quick.' And, anyway, Polly never washed her own muesli bowl. She would sip genteelly at a few spoonfuls, sigh, and say it was just too filling, put it back in the fridge for later . . . where it stayed all day until Kim came to wash it and had to scrub away at the thick gunk which stuck like yesterday's chewing gum. Polly went on about Kim's tea but couldn't see the muesli in her own bowl. Kim liked the expression but daren't try it on Polly who had absolutely no sense of humour and anyway preferred Sadie.

'Polly,' said Sadie one afternoon when Kim was at work, 'let's go for a walk.'

'Oh,' said Polly, 'I have to prepare a class for tomorrow.'

'Do it tonight.'

With mixed feelings Polly went. Glad to be out in the open, wary of emotional trauma. Was Sadie clearing the way for an in-depth discussion of her psyche? They took the bus to Putney and walked down the river to Kew. Sadie was no more outgoing than usual. Soon Polly settled into step beside her, gazing at the pink and white blossom which seemed to have come up overnight. Occasionally she wondered did she and Sadie see the same things or was Sadie lost to the willows, the yellow green of the grass, the knotted roots which looped like veins down the river bank.

'Roots,' said Sadie with sudden enthusiasm as though her thoughts came too quick to allow more than a brief bulletin on their progress. Despite her silence, however, it was Sadie who took charge. She knew what bus to take, which path and where to stop for tea. Polly could wander freely.

And so they arrived at Kew. Pagoda, greenhouses, stands of trees, gardens. Sadie looked at the walled garden. Immediately her eyes were seized by the red glare of the roses, the white, brilliant carnations, the sticky colours of the wild, rampant pansies. The different shades rushed towards her, dragged her around, chasing here a light purple, there an orange; tracing the line of leaf and stalk. It was exhausting. Nothing stayed still longer than the flick of an eyelash but commanded her cesselessly to compare and contrast, return and continue. Straight lines, curves, angles: flowers that looked like paper; flowers that looked like plastic; flowers whose colour changed half way. Just as she thought she knew how it fitted together a breeze would stir and all proportion would softly blur; a bee would buzz and demand consideration. Sounds. Sadie had forgotten sounds. Buzzing, twittering, leaves, voices, footsteps, her heartbeat. The trees looked like a river the way their leaves kept rustling and babbling; as the branches waved towards each other a hundred fish leapt and bounded.

'Pretty whimsy,' she said out loud.

'What are you thinking?' asked Polly, an intrusion usually reserved for actual or would-be lovers.

'It's so demanding,' said Sadie.

'Yes?' said Polly.

Sadie looked at her, wondering was it worth the effort.

'Like a children's playground,' she said. 'The seesaw bump-

ing up and down, the swings soaring, roundabout spinning: from any one the kids might fall and hurt themselves. I feel responsible.'

'I know what you mean,' said Polly.

Sadie doubted this.

'Like it's all set out just for you,' said Polly, 'and you must be appreciative, not miss a nuance.'

'I like Kew,' said Sadie, 'because it's so ordered. All those name-plates. Like a graveyard. But this garden disturbs me.'

'It's a riot,' said Polly.

'A civil disturbance,' said Sadie.

'Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,' said Polly. 'My mother was afraid of anarchy. She lost God, you see, turned her back only for a moment and he was gone. Seemed to have fallen into such disrespect, derision even among her friends and neighbours that she searched around wildly for something else. Something with clear rules, international observance and retributive justice. She found the Highway Code.'

'Oh no,' said Sadie. 'It disturbs, but it fascinates me too. I'm not like Jane with her shears and her pruning-knife.'

'Her hedge-clippers.'

'Her secateurs.'

Sadie gazed again at the garden and suddenly began to laugh. What did she see?

'Oh Polly, it's so funny,' she spluttered.

Polly looked about her.

'What do you see?' asked Sadie still laughing.

'An English country garden, I suppose,' said Polly. But what was funny? Did Sadie see the African bush or the dry park of a mine town?

'Your heritage,' pronounced Sadie. 'You see the well-thumbed pages of your bedtime stories: Beatrix Potter, Milly Molly Mandy, what it means to be English. I know, we had those books too, only our mother had to tell us what foxgloves are, robins and laughing bluebells. I wrote a poem for school: Page 13, Theme number 7, 'A Summer's Day', (our textbooks came from England too). It's all about ice-cream vans and dandelions. In Zambia we didn't exactly have summer, just hot, dry or rainy.'

'But I'm Irish,' said Polly softly, 'not English.'

'Oh,' said Sadie with exasperation, 'Kim then.'

'I doubt it. She never left London except on school trips, and then she said it was a good day out but there were no toilets and she never quite liked to take her shoes off. I imagine very few people feel calmly at one with these flowers.'

'Then why don't you say it? Why don't you all say it? In Africa I knew the names of countless English flowers I had never seen, and those I had around me, that I lived amongst: the water pistol blossoms we pulled from the tree to squirt each other; the ones that dropped down many-coloured that we gathered up for petal gardens; the ones that smelled like a toilet; the ones you could eat, I had no words for and could not own, could not recognise, did not see.'

'What do you see then, Sadie? What makes you laugh so angrily?'

'Look around. You see the red glare of the roses, the white, brilliant carnations, the sticky colour of the wild, rampant pansies? And it turns you around, tosses you about and makes you dizzy at the thought of so much richness, the wonders of creation, these plants quietly getting on with it, year after year, with tree-root tenacity?'

'Yes,' said Polly.

'Then look again. What is that hard round metal poking out from beneath those glorious rhododendrons?'

'It is a wheelbarrow,' said Polly.

'And what wispy line, that hairy parasite on the climbing roses?'

'It is a piece of string,' said Polly, 'it trains the stem to the lattice.'

'And that small woman there in brown, bending attentive to the lawn?'

'It is a gardener,' said Polly, 'and she grips the handle of a mower.'

'I see hedge clippings,' said Sadie, 'and neat borders and litter bins. I see wooden benches and sprinklers and toddlers pushing prams. This garden is no more natural than the grey smudgey stamp in my passport.'

'In Ireland,' mused Polly, 'the flowers are not different from here. The colours maybe, maybe the green is blue there whereas here it is yellow, but I don't think so. I don't think that's it. For the landscape gardeners covered Ireland with ha-has much as they did in England.'

'I went to Wales with Lorraine once,' said Sadie. 'The coach climbed higher and higher and I began to feel sick. We were staying in a little stone cottage and I opened the bathroom window to get some air. A great stony hill rose sharply up in front of me with goat paths and rocky outcrops and for a moment it was Swaziland. There were the two peaks: Kamhla-ba and Elangeni, and this was the rondavel covered in purple bougainvillea; away over to the right would be Mrs Hemp's cottage and down there the stream and the secret garden. And there was the stream! And that flat rock where I used to read letters from Llonka, and chips of wood because Alan had been stoking the boiler; and the frangipani and the gumnuts and the donkeys and the pool at the bottom to swim in and the aloes and the protea. And the day it hailed so hard it took the roofs off the huts in the valley and I collected hailstones and carried them in my flippers for Alan to have in his cocktails. The day the stream flooded and they left the car at the bottom of the hill and my mother took her shoes off and forded the water in her evening dress. But that smooth black stone, what was it? Slate perhaps, blue-grey. And that road over there, where did it lead? Had they built it while I was away? But there was nothing up there, the rondavels were the last house on the mountain. I stared. There were lots of roads. And houses, a council estate, a church, a graveyard. This was not Swaziland it was Wales, and Wales is full not of mountains but of roads. Roads, roads, roads.' Sadie looked round as if surrounded.

'Yes,' said Polly wistfully, 'England isn't Ireland either.'

'Oh it is,' said Sadie gloomily. 'Pretty near.'

'No it isn't,' said Polly, still serious, beginning to feel cross.

'But it is,' Sadie insisted. 'It's all England really.'

'I don't believe it,' said Polly coldly, 'I refuse to stand here and argue about whether or not England is Ireland.'

They stared at each other furiously, then grinned.

'What did you do though?' asked Polly tentatively. 'I mean when Wales had stopped being Swaziland?'

'What do you mean, what did I do? What techniques do I have for coping? How do I live with panoramic schizophrenia?'

'Sadie, what I like about you is your willingness to say how you feel. And what I hate about you is the way you assume you're the only one to have felt it.'

'You do that too, do you? See some kind of similarity, slip

into it so deeply what you see is the comparison not the original until something jars and you are caught suddenly, plummet down between them, all trust betrayed, both lost and trapped, and you don't know where you are or what is happening and your legs shake and you feel sick and dizzy and have to hang on to the walls or the chair leg in order not to be simply blown away. You feel that too?' Sadie was trembling with anger.

'Is that what you did?' Polly asked softly. 'Held on to the furniture?'

'No, I curled up in my sleeping-bag.'

'How sensible. I - I mean I suppose it's different but I like to live as if it doesn't happen to me at all and then it just falls on me and I don't know what to do. Not landscapes but activity, my say in the world, my PhD. I sit there and watch the blue line down my pen on to the paper. My blue vein, my anchor, and I dare not lift the nib from the page nor look round further than the safe, straight edges of the paper.'

'And what do you do?'

'Do? I don't know. Cry. Nothing useful.'

Polly stared unseeing at a neat clean cut on a rose bush, elliptical in shape, light green, ringed. She could feel her shoulders shaking, felt small and grey, felt a hand on her hair, stroking, patting, an arm round her, Sadie holding her.

They walked on across the gardens.

'Marianne North,' said Sadie.

'Howmuch?' said Polly.

To the right of the path was a low house devoted to the permanent exhibition of the exotic paintings of that nomadic Victorian. Polly had never been there before. By themselves they were rather sticky and anthropological; Polly's mouth filled with an array of endless silken orchids. But Sadie's commentary opened them up into real places: flowers that reminded you of your mother, trees you climbed in as a child.

Christ thorn, Polly, look - with the long prickles and the red berries. My feet were like pincushions from falling into those things. Oh and grenadillas, a mouthful of sweet slimy seeds. Those trees there are casuarina. Monday hung me a swing in one but the sap hurt my eyes. Oh and oleander and bougainvillea.

Sadie was like a child in a sweetshop who cannot decide which to settle on.

'England must be difficult,' Polly said to her, 'after living in one of those paintings.'

'Yes,' said Sadie, 'the sun and the space. It's like having to learn everything again but different.'

It was more than that, her life was not a picture, but she did not know how to say it all.

'Wet gravel and windy trees,' Polly was saying, 'that's how I remember Ireland. Not the accents so much or the people.'

'No,' said Sadie, 'it isn't the people. It's not like missing your friends, although of course you do. But it's frightening to see two things at once. There's an oak and you think tree, and then what you see is an acacia because that's what tree means to you.'

That was true, but there was also the sense of not being allowed to say acacia, unless there was a painting in front of you.

'Like living in a metaphor,' Polly suggested.

'Maybe,' said Sadie, 'but the Assumption has rules on which metaphors are permissible and mine always seem to stand outside. I mean, the metaphor isn't the problem.'

'You could try breaking the rules.'

'You don't recognise them? Polly, they're your rules.'

'And yours,' Polly reminded her, 'because you respect them.'

'What does she mean, "There's an oak and you think 'tree', but what you see is an acacia'?' Quercus exploded as Sadie showed Polly The Maids of Honour and the two women ordered cream teas.

Polly felt unexpectedly weary and a shock of great sadness hung over her still. In London one lived mostly amongst concrete and the occasional tree - planted by an environment-conscious council, carefully caged against footballs, netted against birds, and pollarded in summer so the buses could get past. Big cities offered a welcome sameness to the foreigner. Only Sadie, it seemed, refused to play, and reminded Polly that she did not wish to be absorbed into a grey cement block either.

'How can she possibly mistake me for an acacia?' Quercus went on indignantly. 'They are light, elegant, fluttery, whilst I . . .'

'Yes,' Meleleuca interrupted her, 'I can see it's a problem. But you see, what Sadie really means . . .'

'What Sadie really means,' Hakea interrupted in her turn, 'is what Sadie has said. Trouble is, we don't understand what she means.'

'I feel like re-rooting myself and bursting forth in front of her,' Quercus raged, 'me, a solid pillar of the community to be vulgarly confused with one of those jittering wattles oozing with wax and furry with pollen!'

'So what do you make of it?' Melaleuca rounded on Hakea.

'Without us plants to recycle their air supply, of course, they'd lose their vertical and turn into moss pretty damn quick . . .'

'Not a bad thing if you ask me,' interjected Quercus inevitably.

'So I suppose they must mind what happens in the world . . .'

'We know they do. Look how anxious they are about the weather. That's why we have to be so careful when we regulate the water rate,' Melaleuca continued sounding more and more like two-thousand-year-old rock-lichen-the-learned. 'Take their greetings: where you or I would ask of an old friend, or even a mere acquaintance, who they were rubbing petals with, expressing the hope that their days brimmed with pollen, their nights with sweetest resin, these Huwomen offer, in tones hushed and trembling, "It's getting quite overcast, I'm afraid it's going to rain."

'Yes Melaleuca,' sighed Hakea, 'are we back then in the nursery, still trained to some dry stick? These things we take for granted, but what if we were wrong?'

Polly leaned back against the chintz cushion of her chair. The flames in the grate flowed and flickered like water over rocks. A real fire. Sadie had conducted her to this chair, knowing she would like the fire, would appreciate the delicacy of scones warm from just baking though the coffee was poison. And Sadie was a coffee drinker. Before, Polly had been irritated by the great gush about Africa. Sadie's tone of childish wonder struck her as disingenuous: she was neither that young nor was it that recent so must not the immediacy be false? There seemed to be no questions in Sadie's mind, no uneasiness. She spoke of the flowers as if they, in all their undoubted diversity, were the entire population of the country. Was Sadie really oblivious to the racist nature of her life there? 'Monday hung me a swing in

a casuarina tree.' Who was Monday? 'A Black servant, clearly, and his name, a white man's joke. And then Sadie lumped the whole of the British Isles together as if she saw no difference there either.

A woman arrived with a tray of tea and a plate of cakes. Polly pulled her gaze away from the flames to see Sadie looking at her.

'My turn now,' said Sadie, pouring the tea, thanking the woman who brought it. 'What are you thinking, Polly?'

'Arrogance perhaps,' murmured Hakea. 'Gigantic arrogance to assume that they are obsessed with us merely because we are.'

'One pot plant to every room,' countered Melaleuca, 'and what with the atomiser sprays, the soil thermometers, the bio leaf shine, we're treated like little household gods.'

'We see what we expect. Just now Sadie was talking to Polly about plants.'

'Well exactly.'

'But as though it were allowed. A trifle. A nothing.'

'How perfectly horrible.'

'In Hortus, at the least hint of bother, someone calls a water rates meeting to discuss the Huwomen and avoid a fight.'

'I was thinking about your stories of Africa,' Polly replied. watching the butter melt on her scone so she could put on another layer, to hell with cholesterol. 'They sound like yesterday, as though you hadn't catalogued them yet but let them tumble out.'

'As if? Calculated spontaneity?'

'Not weary. Not like you'd told them a hundred times before.'

'I haven't.'

'It's all you've talked about today.'

'My excitement bothers you? You want me to have aired my views elsewhere, arrive here with sophisticated finish?'

'I'd like you to have some views!' Polly rejoined crossly. She liked Sadie's freshness. "You're so unjaundiced, my dear," who can say that?

'Views, opinions, the well-educated man can converse on any topic?'

'Well, what do you think, Sadie? What you talk about are the bloody flowers. Of course you didn't live in South Africa, but everyone knows it's the same all over. I mean it's still a racist regime. I mean we're talking about imperialism, aren't we? And you benefited from it. You can't say you were too young to be responsible. It's a liberal luxury to ask to be taken on your own merits, simply as an individual. We all know that.'

'As it seems we all already know everything, there is no need for me to add to the pile.'

'But you actually lived there,' insisted Polly. 'I'm sure you have things to say.'

'Good, then perhaps we can dispense with the Lenin prologue.'

'Whatever are you suggesting? You know if you were Black...'

'But I'm not, and you're not.'

'No, I'm Irish and Kim's working-class English and that's different again, yet you lump us all together simply so that you stand out.'

'But I do stand out, Polly,' Sadie replied, 'and so do you and so does Kim in other ways and how the hell is any of us ever going to talk about those ways if we have to do a coverall speech every time about recognising everyone's oppression?'

'You come from a white racist regime, Sadie, I mean you just can't say that you are in any way oppressed.'

'I'll say whatever I bloody well like.'

'God, you're so childish.'

'Probably, but then I'm nearly twenty years younger than you so you're going to have to put up with it. As well as all your unrealistic ideas about the good you can do me.'

'Sadie, belligerence is no more charming than petulance.'

'Listen Polly, I recognise it. Of course I fucking recognise it. Even I know more about it than you do. But I am sick to death of tapping these little plastic tokens on the table as if we were having a real conversation. It's like a bloody game of monopoly. You serve me with racist South Africa - often that's a trump card with such emotional force no one can go on playing . . .'

'But you return with British Nationality Laws and hadn't I noticed what we do to Black people here . . .'

'You sidestep that you're Irish.'
