was convinced that I would not be able to get up again. I had visions of walking around as a cripple. I became intensely jealous of those people more flexible than I who appeared to have no difficulties sitting. I knew that what I was doing was not really zazen, for in zazen you are supposed to feel calm and be free of thoughts. All I was doing was trying to think of thoughts to distract me from the pain. Finally, during one of the last breaks, hoping for some secret to make the pain go away, I again expressed my concern and frustration to Tanouye Roshi. I explained that whatever I did, the pain continue to worsen. Instead of giving me a way to reduce the pain he said, "The pain isn't getting worse, your tolerance of it is getting less."

I felt disappointed. Hoping that he would tell me some trick to ease the pain or at least reassure me that the pain would go away, Tanouye Roshi was telling me to learn to live with it. Anyway, I did not really believe him. I was convinced that the pain was, in fact, getting worse. Stifling the urge to leave the sesshin and quit Zen training, I forced myself to continue.

Then, during one of the last rounds of zazen, something happened. By then the pain was so great that I was leaning backwards in order to take some of the weight off my legs. Tanouye Roshi walked around the hall as we sat in order to inspect our postures. As he came near me, I resolved to sit properly, without slouching, regardless of the pain. Just when he came in front of me, I suddenly felt detached from the pain. I cannot say that I did not feel the pain any less, but it did not bother me as much. It was as though I had accepted the pain and was able to tolerate it. That tolerance lasted through the end of sesshin. Afterwards I realized that Tanouye Roshi was right: my tolerance of the pain was the problem, not the pain itself.

In spite of having left the Chicago sesshin encouraged to continue practicing zazen, my difficulties with it were only beginning. While I was able to assume a rough variation of a half-lotus, it was as painful as my earlier posture. Then, about

a year later, I injured my knee which made sitting cross-legged even more difficult. Because of that, I did zazen in the seiza position (sitting on the knees with feet tucked under the buttocks) for about a year after that. The posture was less painful for short periods of time. However, because everyone else was sitting in the half-lotus and lotus positions, I continued to see that as my goal.

When I went to Chozen-ji the first time, I felt that I was at a choice point. My knee had healed to the point where I thought it was safe to sit cross-legged. I felt that if I did not begin sitting cross-legged soon, it would become more difficult to do as I got older. So I began sitting in my version of the half-lotus.

Zazen at Chozen-Ji brought unexpected difficulties. The evening sitting is comprised of two forty-five-minute periods. I had not sat cross-legged for over year, and I was quite stiff. After the first few nights, I had something happen to me that I had never experienced before. About halfway into the second sitting, my body tensed up and began to shake uncontrollably. Nothing I did could control the shaking for more than a few minutes. This was highly irregular behavior in a Zen temple, where no gross movements are permitting during zazen.

In Zen temples, the person who is in charge of the sitting is called the jikijitsu. During the sittings he walks around carrying a light wooden stick, called a keisaku, which he uses to rap students on their backs. The blow relieves cramping and focuses the student's attention. The student may request a hit by pressing his palms together when the jikijitsu walks in front of him. In the Rinzai tradition, the jikijitsu has the option of striking the student without being asked to do so if he feels that it will help the student keep still or concentrate better. On seeing me shake, the jikijitsu came and rapped me with the stick. I calmed down for a while. When I resumed shaking, he hit me again. The sequence was repeated several times. Finally, he stopped, though I continued to shake throughout the remainder of the sitting.

This problem remained with me throughout my stay at

Chozen-Ji. Every evening, during the second evening sitting, no matter what I did, I would shake. I tried to control it by forcing my breath harder into my hara. Surprisingly, this often made the shaking worse. I knew the shaking was a reaction to the pain and I kept thinking that if only my body would relax, the sitting would not be painful and I would be able to stop shaking. Each night the jikijitsu would stand before me and help me try to regain control. He had the option to dismiss me from the sittings and I was concerned that I might be asked to leave the temple.

On the last night of my first stay at Chozen-Ji, I decided to keep from shaking no matter what it took. It would be the decisive battle; I wanted to leave the dojo with dignity. I took my position for the first sitting and steeled myself for the onslaught of pain. After about five minutes, I felt something drop onto my head and start moving. "It could only be a centipede!" I thought. Earlier in the day, while digging, we had unearthed a number of them. Because they are poisonous, we always gave them wide berths. Occasionally, they drop from the rafters onto the floor of the meditation hall below. While I had never heard of one landing on someone, there had to be a first time. I fought the urge to brush it off and resolved that I would get bitten before I would move. With sweat streaming down my face, I felt it crawl on my head for the next half hour, until the bell sounded ending the sitting. I did not get bitten and I did not move. I quietly exited the hall and brushed the creature off my head. To my surprise, it wasn't even a centipede, but a harmless black beetle. Laughing out loud on the verandah, I thought that if I could sit through that, I could sit through the second period without shaking.

I walked back into the meditation hall feeling more confident. I sat back down on my cushion. Somebody came up to me and bowed. I leaned forward and was told that Tanouye Roshi wanted to talk to me. I got up and went into the kitchen. Earlier in the day a visiting Japanese kyudo master, Onuma Sensei, had visited the dojo. The roshi told me that he had just had

emergency surgery and asked me to accompany Mrs. Tanouye to the hospital to talk to the doctors. He wanted us to leave immediately. I missed the second round of zazen; the decisive battle was postponed.

Two years after leaving Chozen-Ji I returned for two weeks. In the interval, I had continued to practice zazen and felt that my sitting had improved. However, I had seldom sat for periods as long as the evening zazen at Chozen-Ji. I was anxious to see if I could make it through both sittings without shaking. During the second round of the first night, the familiar pains returned, and with them, the shaking. However, this time I was able to control them by concentrating on breathing slowly and deeply. This stopped the shaking and I never experienced it again. I also understood better what Tanouye Toshi had told me in Chicago about taking the pain up by my hara.

What had changed? Why was I able to control the shaking which had bothered me so much before? I had acquired better control of my breathing and posture in the intervening period. I realized that two years earlier I was tensing my upper torso, especially my chest and neck, in reaction to the pain. The muscular tension caused even more pain; which, in turn, resulted in more tension, causing me to shake. The shaking was an involuntary way of discharging the tension. The tension also made it difficult for me to breath properly. When I tried to set my hara, I also tensed the muscles in my upper body; this made the shaking worse. On that second visit to Chozen-Ji I realized I had learned to use my breath to relax the muscles in my upper torso rather than tightening them in the face of pain. I also understood better what Tanouye Roshi had told me in Chicago about taking the pain up by my hara. By being able, in the face of pain, to relax my upper body and tense my lower abdomen while maintaining deep abdominal breathing, I was able to detach myself from the pain.

My expectations of being able to sit without pain had also changed. I had thought it was possible to sit without pain and

that there was something wrong with me because I could not. When I saw other students sitting, particularly those more advanced than I, I assumed they were not in as much pain as I. Even when they told me they found zazen painful or difficult, I did not quite believe them. Or, I assumed that because of my unusual lack of flexibility, the amount of pain I felt was much greater than theirs. However, the more I talked to other students, the more I came to believe them. I realized they sat better because they could tolerate pain better than I. This became clear to me when I saw students who were even stiffer than I sit, not only without shaking, but also without appearing to be in much pain. It finally became clear that my problem was not so much flexibility or the amount of pain that it caused; the problem was my intolerance of that pain. Instead of waiting for a miracle to happen that would enable me to sit painlessly, I realized I had to focus on learning to live with the pain.

Today I can sit for long periods of time without undue distress. I have been able to sit through sesshin without the difficulties that I experienced earlier on. In part, this is because the pain has decreased. But, as my breathing has improved, I have been able to relax my body even more. While my posture is certainly not equivalent to those more limber people able to sit full lotus from the beginning, it has improved substantially. I am also able to tolerate the pain better. I can detach myself from pain so that it does not distract me as it once did.

My difficulties with flexibility and posture are certainly not unique. Many Westerners, raised sitting in chairs rather than on the floor, have difficulty sitting cross-legged. Because of differences in anatomy, this appears to be truer for men than women. I know there are those who suggest that Westerners meditate in chairs or in the kneeling position if the cross-legged positions are uncomfortable. For me, this would have been a mistake. I feel strongly that I made the right decision when I arrived at Chozen-Ji. I am convinced the cross-legged positions are superior because, more so than kneeling and sitting in a

chair, they promote proper breathing and posture. Fighting the pain caused by sitting cross-legged was an important growth experience for me. In a way my stiffness was an advantage. By having to fight the pain, I had no alternative but to improve my breath control in order to contain it.

In the last few years I have been teaching introductory workshops in zazen geared to people studying martial arts. Many of the participants have great difficulty sitting cross-legged and want to know about alternative positions. I try to discourage them from abandoning the half-lotus and lotus positions. In most cases I can honestly tell them I was stiffer than they when I began. I tell them that if I can sit cross-legged, then almost anybody can. Most of the time I feel that they do not believe me. I see them react as I did to Tanouye Roshi at that first sesshin. I also tell them that Zen training is difficult; that one way or another, they will have to overcome obstacles in themselves that can cause considerable pain and suffering.

For those students who have little difficulty with the physical aspects of training, there will be other inner obstacles to overcome in the course of training. Zen training is a constant struggle against the ego, which is the seat of thoughts and emotions that cloud our awareness. These thoughts and feelings, referred to collectively as delusions, are often compared to demons. They swarm over us and seduce us into pursuing them. Over the course of training, one becomes aware of how pervasive such delusions are and how difficult it is to break the grip they have over us.

Shortly after I started studying kyudo at Chozen-Ji, Tanouye Roshi asked me what I thought of it. I said something like, "It's very difficult." Tanouye Roshi said, "Yes, the target doesn't move." His comment underscored a very important principle in kyudo.

Written on the target house of the kyudo dojo at Chozen-Ji is the Japanese saying "Senshobutsu-Hankyushin." Jackson Morisawa translates it as "correcting things first runs counter to the search for oneself." $^{1}$ A more colloquial translation of this

same saying is "When the gentleman archer misses his mark, he looks inward."

Because the target is stationary in kyudo, one must accept full responsibility for one's performance. Any imperfection of the shot comes from imperfection in oneself. In this sense, the target is internal. To cut through the waves of delusional thoughts that cloud our perception, to destroy the ego; that is the true target in kyudo. This is shown in an old poem:

No target's erected

No bow's drawn

And the arrow leaves the string:

It may not hit,

But it does not miss. $^{2}$

Carved over the entrance to the tea room which adjoins the kyudo dojo at Chozen-Ji is the Japanese saying "Mu-i," which means "fearlessness." The word alludes to a story told about Yamoaka Tesshu, a nineteenth-century lay Zen master, who was also a master of kendo and shodo. Omori Rotaishi is successor to Tesshu's lines of kendo and shodo. The story is as follows:

A young fencer who asked him about the inmost secret of the Way of fencing was told to go to the Kannon Temple at Asakusa and pray to be given enlightenment about it.

After a week the man came back and said, "I went every day and prayed for a long time but nothing came in response. But as I was coming away yesterday, for the first time I noticed what is written above the shrine: THE GIFT OF FEARLESSNESS. Was that what you meant?"

"It was," replied Tesshu. "The secret of our Way is complete fearlessness. But it has to be complete. Some there are who are not afraid to face enemies with swords, but who cringe before the assaults of passions like greed and delusions like fame. The end of our Way of fencing is to have no fear at all when confronting the inner enemies as well as the outer enemies."3

In kyudo, we must look inward and face our inner enemies. As one progresses in kyudo, one gains increasing insight into one's psychological makeup. This is a painful process, for we must acknowledge flaws in our character that make us miss our mark. Greed, competitiveness, vanity, self-criticism, shyness, fear, need for approval are but a few of the personality characteristics that can lead to delusive thoughts that cloud our awareness in kyudo. We must recognize these flaws before we can transcend them.

I started teaching kyudo about one year after returning to the United States. Shortly afterwards, I developed a problem with my release. For some reason, my arrows started flying wildly; at times they would even travel end over end. Although I was shooting from a distance of three feet, they would either miss the makiwara entirely or they would hit it at an angle and not penetrate. Either way, the arrows hit the dojo walls, leaving a series of holes in the plaster. I could not figure out why this was happening.

I became depressed over this and was embarrassed to let my students see such poor performance; what kind of role model would I be if I shot so poorly? I started to hide my problem from them by not shooting during class. Even practicing alone, I became increasingly self-conscious about my release. Eventually I stopped practicing altogether. I was 10,000 miles from my teachers in Hawaii and worried that by the time I saw Mr. Morisawa again, this bad habit would be so ingrained that it would be extremely difficult to break. I felt I was letting my teachers and students down.

In desperation, I went to Chicago to have another kyudo student see me shoot. He pointed out that I was flinching the instant before the release. Instead of increasing tension throughout kai by allowing the force of my breath steadily to expand my chest, I was losing control of my breath at the last moment. When I lost my hara, my chest contracted. Because my right elbow was not locked properly behind my shoulder, this contraction allowed my right hand to be pulled abruptly

towards the bow, causing a jerky release and, in turn, the erratic flight of the arrow.

I went back to Madison and concentrated on my breathing and posture while shooting. This enabled me to maintain the continuous pressure necessary for the release. My arrows once again flew in a straight trajectory.

Once I had corrected my release, I realized there was a deeper significance to the problem I had been having: it reflected the insecurity I had about my new role as kyudo teacher. My desire to impress my students had "stopped my mind" and interrupted my breathing and posture. My flinching at the moment of truth came from fear that I would not shoot impressively. It was a way of cringing psychologically, and physically, at the prospect of failure. It perpetuated itself: the more I cringed, the worse I shot; the worse I shot, the more tentative I became. It was difficult for me to acknowledge that, at my stage of training, I still had such insecurity. However, once acknowledged, I was able to overcome it. I also realized that I had made a fundamental mistake by hiding my problems from my students. Had I been unafraid to shoot poorly in front of them, I would have been a much better model. By failing to look inward when I missed my mark, I also missed the opportunity to demonstrate an important principle of kyudo.

When Zen was introduced from China to Japan in the thirteenth century, it was readily adopted by the samurai class in Kamakura. Some say they were attracted to it because it helped them overcome their fears of death. $^{4}$ Fear of death is attachment to life. Such attachment could distract them on the battlefield and decrease their effectiveness and ultimately speed their deaths. The samurai were known as great students of Zen. This has been attributed to the fact that for them Zen training was a life and death issue. The application of Zen principles to the fighting arts gave rise to the martial arts now referred to as Do or Ways. The practice of the arts became, at their highest levels, ways to cut through delusions, ways to fight the ego. Instruments that once were weapons of war become tools of

self-development. The arrow in kyudo is aimed at oneself.

Chozen-Ji is a Zen temple in the tradition of the samurai in that it integrates Zen training with training in the Ways. However, few students today view their Zen or martial arts training with the urgency of the samurai. Nevertheless, the struggle of the Zen student today and that of the samurai is the same; it is a struggle with oneself, with one's ego. To impress students with the seriousness of Zen training and to motivate them to discipline themselves, attempts are made to foster in them the intensity of the samurai. At Chozen-Ji, it is common for students to be admonished for "losing" to dishes they were washing or the food they were eating. This is a way of saying that they allowed themselves to get distracted in the midst of an activity. A similar lapse of concentration in a critical situation, such as battle, could mean death.

In explaining the importance of the kyudo dojo, Jackson Morisawa writes:

The Dojo is literally the battlefield of life, a "field of life and death." The only difference between it and the battlefield of war is that in the Dojo the trainee may die many times over and live to count these deaths as experiences which benefit his development in the ways and eventually to be able to transcend life and death. $^{5}$

Here Mr. Morisawa is referring to the ongoing struggle with the ego. The student who approaches kyudo with the spirit that it is in fact a war--a war with oneself--will progress the most quickly. In this war, one must face physical and psychological pain in order to experience the fruits of victory.

The point of experiencing pain and suffering inside the dojo is to be able to face pain and suffering in everyday life. Zanshin is incomplete if mushin cannot be maintained in the face of adversity. In this vein, Tanouye Roshi once told me how business men often come to him for advice on business matters. He told me that in many instances his advice proved to be sound, resulting in considerable financial gain to his advisees.

When I heard this, I was surprised. He quickly cut off my reaction by saying, "Teaching people to make money is one thing. Helping them maintain their dignity while going bankrupt is another." He then went on to tell about times he had done just that--helped people maintain their dignity in the midst of bankruptcy. Another time he said that it is easy for people to be happy when they are happy. The challenge of Zen is to be happy when you are sad.

By learning to maintain equipoise whether one hits or misses the target in the kyudo dojo, one learns to maintain equipoise in daily life. The setbacks and frustrations in kyudo become a microcosm in which one learns to face the trials and tribulations of life. One learns to maintain proper breathing, posture, and concentration whether or not the arrow hits its mark so one can face difficulties in life in the same fashion. One learns to take up pain in one's hara in the dojo so that one can live with hara at all times.

The true test of a kyudoka's zanshin is his reaction to disappointments in life. It is insufficient for a kyudo student to maintain composure when he misses the target only to become unnerved by life's problems. Similarly, it is insufficient for him to look inward when he misses the paper target only to blame others for inadequacies that cause problems for him outside the dojo. The kyudo student endeavors to take life's difficulties in stride. To face hardships and disappointments with the calm that one has when one misses the target; to have the same composure in the face of calamity that the master has when his string breaks at full draw; to accept full responsibility for one's mistakes and to try again; that is true zanshin. The student who strives to live his life that way understands that the true target in kyudo is not the piece of paper that is ninety feet away; the true target is within.

# CHAPTER 8 Kiai

"Your arrows do not carry," observed the Master, "because they do not reach far enough spiritually."

Eugen Herrigel¹

One day during my first stay at Chozen-Ji, I helped load a truck with fallen timber to be hauled to the city dump. Afterwards, I started up the driveway to the front of the temple grounds, oblivious to the fact that the loaded truck was about to hit me. Seeing this, Tanouye Roshi cuffed me on the shoulder to get me out of the way. This, however, was no ordinary cuff. While I felt his hand touch my shoulder, his touch was light. At the same time, it was electrifying. There was a force behind him that exceeded the combined mass and velocity of his hand. It jolted me to attention and I jumped out of danger. Looking up, I saw Tanouye Roshi looking at me and shaking his head in a manner that, by then, had become quite familiar. It took me a few minutes to figure out what had happened.

There is, in Eastern thought, a belief in a force the Japanese call ki and the Chinese call ch'i. In short, ki can best be described as the basic driving force of the Universe. It is the universal energy from which all substance and all life is made. It is also the driving force behind consciousness and, for that reason, is often described as "psychophysical energy."

I first heard of ki at a martial arts demonstration when I was in high school. I was told that, through the practice of the martial arts, it is possible to learn to tap into that cosmic energy and channel it in a way that produces a power different from that of muscular strength. I learned that the names of two

the second person at a mechanical disadvantage making it difficult for him to bend the arm further. What some called ki, they convinced me, was actually explainable by the less esoteric laws of biomechanics. Gradually, I lost interest in the idea of ki.

When I was introduced to Zen by Mike Sayama, I was surprised to learn that he took the existence of ki as a given. I gathered that it played an important role in training at Chozen-Ji. When I first heard Tanouye Roshi lecture on Zen at the first sesshin I attended, he used the term closely related to ki, kiai. Kiai literally means "harmony with ki" and typically refers to a specific manifestation or embodiment of ki. $^{2}$ He told the following story:

A wealthy man wanted to give a very large sum of money to a Zen temple. However, he explained that there was one stipulation: He asked to be able to observe the monks in zazen. This was a highly irregular request, since by protocol only the monks were allowed in the hall during zazen. But his financial offer was so generous that the abbot of the temple found it very difficult to turn down. So, they worked out a compromise of sorts. The patron was told that if he came to the temple at such and such a time he would be able to observe the monks from the outside through a knot hole in the wall. Before zazen began on the designated day, the abbot told the monks to sit as intensely as they could. And they did. When the patron arrived and put his eye to the knot hole, he was knocked over backwards by the kiai that was generated by the monks.

I politely listened to this story, as I did whenever he spoke about kiai. I guessed that Zen masters were not beyond superstitions.

About two years later, I was at a professional conference in Monterey, California. When it was over, I rented a car and drove to Tassajara where I spent a day and night. Tassajara is a
