differences between the two governments had been resolved. The contrast between the governor's openness at press conferences and during walkabouts and Lu Ping's stiff and formal style was widely noted, again to the former's advantage. Tsang Yok Sing confided, 'I believe Lu Ping should and could have done a lot better . . . we can't see what China or Lu Ping himself can lose by meeting the governor.' Except, he might have added, 'face'. Even Vincent Lo, China's most loyal advocate, admitted: 'I would like to see the two of them sit down and really thrash things out.' But he judged that China was making an explicit and fundamental point.

On the third day of his visit, Lu Ping and his entourage were stricken by food poisoning. Government House (which monitored the NCNA offices just as carefully as the Chinese were presumed to bug the British embassy in Beijing) discovered that Lu Ping himself had had to be given glucose intravenously. Muttering, 'It wouldn't have happened here,' Patten took malicious delight in sending Lu Ping his best wishes for a speedy recovery. By the time of the director's departure, it was quite clear that he had signally failed to dent Patten's image.

The concern within Government House about public opinion sometimes bordered on the neurotic, and the relief when Patten's ratings survived the visit intact was palpable. Yet his need to demonstrate that he remained at the centre of events, still confidently guiding Hong Kong's destiny, was not narrowly egotistical; his desire to secure the passage of his reforms through LegCo, notwithstanding Martin Lee's scepticism, governed his every move. Perhaps for this reason, Patten still allowed himself to believe that Lu Ping would have to meet him before long: nothing would do more to enhance his local standing and to undermine his critics. Patten's problem, which he sometimes seemed to forget, was that the Chinese were as aware of this as he was.

An illustration of the governor's sensitivity at this time was his response to the news that Sir Percy Cradock had once again chosen to intervene in Hong Kong's affairs. On a visit to the colony immediately before Lu Ping's arrival, Cradock had gone straight from the airport to meet the director of the NCNA, Zhou Nan, where, according to Tsang Yok Sing, who leaked the story to journalists, he advised Zhou Nan that Lu Ping should refuse the governor's invitation. He was reported to have warned that such a meeting would send the wrong message from China to the British government and would demonstrate that Beijing could be bullied into submission; that it would have overtones of the Opium Wars. As soon as this alleged act of treachery was reported to Government House, one of Patten's aides was on the line to the Foreign Office, demanding that Cradock issue a statement to

clarify his comments. Instead, after an interval, the former diplomat simply denied that such a conversation had occurred. Some days later, one of Patten's friends confided that the governor was still 'spitting' at this latest 'betrayal'.

Patten's resolve was also being tested from another quarter. Despite his brisk rejection of Douglas Hurd's suggestion the previous summer that he was needed back home, the issue had not gone away, and Westminster gossip continued to float his candidature for a senior position in the government. At the end of May 1994, these rumours reached Hong Kong, where newspapers reported that John Major had asked him to return as Conservative party chairman, an offer which he had refused. With the fate of Patten's reforms teetering in the balance, the suggestion that the prime minister wanted to withdraw him from Hong Kong was very far from helpful. Government House at once issued a statement dismissing the reports as nonsense and reiterating that the governor would stay until 1 July 1997. As it stood the statement was true - the prime minister had not asked Patten to return as party chairman - but it was also misleading. For while Patten was not seeking to leave Hong Kong prematurely, he knew that the prime minister was anxious to secure his services. Indeed, early in the summer, Major approached Patten directly 'as a friend', to ask whether, once he had steered his electoral reforms on to the statute book, he would consider returning to the Cabinet as his most senior colleague.

The prime minister offered his trusted political ally an astonishing brief: he could become leader of the Lords and foreign secretary, as well as taking over the vacant role of deputy prime minister. Apart from Major himself, Patten would become the most powerful man in the Cabinet. Patten was flattered, but once again he declined, observing gently that the prime minister really needed someone like Lord Whitelaw, who had served as Margaret Thatcher's shrewd and unflappable deputy prime minister in the eighties. Major replied that this was precisely why he wanted him back in London. But Patten insisted that, unless instructed otherwise, he could not honourably renege on his duty to Hong Kong.

Although he sympathised with Major's plight, Patten thought that the prime minister's approach reflected a failure to recognise the significance of the responsibility he was attempting to discharge on Britain's behalf as the colony's last governor. It was a feeling he had had when Douglas Hurd had approached him the year before. On that occasion it had seemed to him somewhat perverse that a British foreign secretary, of all people, should appear to place the difficulties of the Tory party above the reputation of a nation. Although he had by no means 'gone

native', Patten retained an acute sense that his was a momentous assignment, and he was disappointed that Major, like Hurd, appeared unable to share that sense of history. Instead, yet again, and in an exceptionally demanding period, the prime minister had unwittingly left Patten with the impression that Britain's mission in Hong Kong somehow mattered less in 10 Downing Street than the future of his troubled administration at Westminster. For a while Patten brooded on this: it did nothing to cheer him.

There were other irritations as well. Henry Keswick, the chairman of Jardine Matheson, one of the most powerful 'Hongs', had been one of the very few international business leaders not to have deserted the governor early on in his battle with Beijing. Now he, too, abandoned him - and in circumstances which infuriated Patten. After transferring the company's place of incorporation from Hong Kong to the apparently safer financial haven of Bermuda in 1984, the Jardine board had refrained from criticising the British stance as the company continued to weather China's outbursts of hostility. Although Patten was not so naive as to suppose that Keswick's tacit support sprang from altruism, he was dismayed when the magnate began to behave in a way which clearly suggested that he expected a return on his investment. It was Keswick's habit to fly into Hong Kong three times a year, usually accompanied by senior members of his 'absentee' board, for an intensive round of meetings with key executives in Hong Kong. Invariably on these occasions, they would expect, and duly received, an invitation to Government House. In March 1994, in his capacity as a member of Jardine's main board, Sir Charles Powell, Margaret Thatcher's former adviser at Number 10, made use of this access to press Patten to exercise his authority on Keswick's behalf.

In 1991, Henry Keswick had decided to move Jardine Matheson's primary stock-exchange listing to London, leaving only a secondary listing in Hong Kong. By 1993, Jardine was operational in thirty countries and employed a workforce of more than 200,000. Keswick was impatient to liberate the company from the constraints of the Hong Kong takeover code, and his lawyers embarked on discussions with the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC). Arguing that the company was soon to become subject to Bermuda's takeover code, they tried to convince the SFC that its shareholders would lose none of the protection afforded them by the Hong Kong code. The SFC was not impressed. Keswick was enraged by what he regarded as pettifogging and vindictive decisions by second-rate bureaucrats.

Powell was dispatched to Government House to demand that Patten exercise his gubernatorial powers to overturn the SFC's decision. Patten

refused. The governor's aides, reflecting his own strong feelings, emerged from this meeting filled with indignation at what they saw as a blatant attempt to 'call in the favours' that the Keswicks had hitherto bestowed on the governor. At a subsequent meeting a few days later, at which Powell was joined by Henry Keswick's brother Simon, the two men made the case again. Once more they were rebuffed by Patten, who insisted that it would be quite improper for him to intervene. 'We won't be bullied,' he said afterwards.

Keswick ran Jardine as if it were his own fiefdom, although by now his family owned only some 15 per cent of the shares. In March 1994, thwarted by the SFC, the company took the drastic step of withdrawing its listing from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Keswick declared that his decision did not signal any lack of confidence in the future of Hong Kong itself. 'We are as confident as ever in Hong Kong's future . . . we wish to continue to expand our investment in and business links with Hong Kong, China and the whole Asia Pacific region,' he said. This did not find favour among his employees in Hong Kong, who regarded the decision to delist as an act of pique and a betrayal of their loyalty by an arrogant and distant board as indifferent to their individual fates as it was to that of Hong Kong. The governor had similar feelings. He was not surprised when the Keswicks ceased to press for invitations to Government House, although Sir Charles Powell remained one of his confidants. The discovery that Keswick now referred to him as 'that bloody little socialist' merely confirmed Patten's impression that the tycoon was faintly ridiculous.

At the end of May Patten found himself under assault from his democratic allies on another front. It emerged that he had authorised a decision to bar two Chinese dissidents now resident in the United States from coming to Hong Kong to take part in the annual 4 June rally in Victoria Park to commemorate Tiananmen Square. Under pressure from the local media, Government House insisted, without much conviction, that Hong Kong could not be used as a base for dissidents. The governor's apparent failure to live up to his own rhetoric about human rights provoked the censure of democratic activists, which embarrassed and irritated him. As one of his aides commented privately, 'I'm afraid we have handled this very badly. It has been looked on by some as another example of the government kowtowing to China.'

Patten earned even more opprobrium from the same quarter when he made it clear that he opposed the establishment of a Human Rights Commission for Hong Kong. Arguing that the Bill of Rights, which was already on the statute book, was protection enough, he claimed

that his forthcoming Equal Opportunities Bill would take care of all outstanding issues, and faced down the human-rights activists in LegCo - even to the extent of barring Anna Wu, a respected independent member, from tabling a motion in favour of a commission. For good measure he made it clear that he would also reject an Access to Information Bill proposed by Christine Loh. Both these decisions were presented as if they had emanated from ExCo, but no one was in any doubt that they originated with the governor. His reason for refusing to countenance the 'all-singing, all-dancing legislative effort', as he described Anna Wu's motion, was that, as he confided later, he had come to the conclusion that the community would not stomach another huge fight with China. He argued that the same ends could be achieved by other means which might involve 'running skirmishes with the Chinese rather than another nuclear confrontation'.

Christine Loh was one of the governor's own appointees to LegCo. Brought up to enjoy the middle-class comforts of a prosperous merchant's family, as a teenager in the late 1960s she had been more interested in sport than politics. Her father was a refugee from Shanghai but unusually, her mother, who had been born in Hong Kong, could trace her family back through four generations as colonial subjects. Like that of most of her peers, Loh's knowledge of China was culled from newspapers and television; the vicissitudes of life in the People's Republic did not impinge significantly on her early life. At the end of that decade she was sent to school in England and did not return to Hong Kong until 1979. At the age of twenty-three, armed with a law degree and a belated zest for public affairs, she took lessons in Chinese and soon became involved in 'fringe' politics as a member of a group called the Hong Kong Observers, which lobbied for the extension of human rights and democracy in the colony. Although Loh had reservations about the Joint Declaration, it was not until the Tiananmen Square outrage that she became convinced that the 1997 transition would be fraught with danger. Encouraged by the appointment of Chris Patten as governor, she was astonished, in October 1992, to be invited up to Government House, where the chief secretary, Sir David Ford, asked if she would accept the governor's appointment to a seat on the Legislative Council. She thought, 'My God, I can't believe this!' Over the next few hours, she discussed the offer with other activists, all of whom advised her to accept. 'This is a vital opportunity to promote the liberal cause,' they told her. She took their advice. Six months later, she said, as if still off balance, 'Chris Patten has completely changed my life.'

But now some of the governor's liberal critics began to wonder

whether his genial demeanour concealed an authoritarian streak. Six months earlier, in November 1993, Patten had made a speech at the Foreign Correspondents' Club in which he had attacked those moral relativists who liked to believe that the issue of human rights was essentially a Western obsession amounting to a 'neo-colonial incursion into Asian affairs'. Put the other way round, if it were argued that human rights weren't really appropriate for Asia, Latin America or Africa, the proposition would, he avowed, rightly be regarded as sanctimonious, if not racist.

If you are a journalist locked up for months for telling the truth; if you are a trades-unionist incarcerated for championing workers' rights; if you're thrown out of your country and deprived of your rights; if you're beaten over the head, or worse, by a policeman, the brutal result is the same, whether it happens in Europe, or Asia, or America, or Africa. Human rights are indivisible and interdependent.

It was a stirring dissertation no previous governor would have essayed. That China was the principal object of his scorn was in no doubt, yet - or so it seemed to the activists in Hong Kong - the self-appointed champion of human rights seemed overly willing to retreat from these heady values when it came to the crunch. They were disappointed and angry.

To make matters even more tiresome, two of his senior officials disagreed in public about the scope of the government's Equal Opportunities Bill. Patten wanted Anson Chan to handle the presentation of the policy, but she insisted that it was the responsibility of the home affairs secretary, Michael Suen. Evidently ill briefed, he mishandled the press conference. On the most sensitive issue of all, he stated that the government's bill would not include proposals to outlaw sexual discrimination in the workplace. Mark Fisher, a British Labour politician who was in Hong Kong to support Christine Loh's unsuccessful attempt to introduce her Freedom of Information Bill, watched bemused as the hapless official stumbled through his brief. It was, Fisher judged, a 'pitiful performance'.

The following day, members of LegCo, led by Anna Wu and Christine Loh, expressed their fury at the government's apparent indifference to the issues at stake. To limit the damage, Patten's press secretary, Michael Hanson, rushed out a statement insisting that, despite what Michael Suen had appeared to say, the government's Equal Opportunities Bill would after all include measures relating to sexual harassment. The home affairs secretary doggedly stuck to his guns. He

was not aware that the scope of the bill was to be extended in this way, he said, adding: 'Mr Hanson does not represent the government.' Patten was furious. Although he eventually prevailed, the incident could not have occurred at a worse moment. As one of his aides admitted, 'It was a huge cock-up.' It certainly confirmed the impression, seized on by his adversaries, that, as an administrator, Patten was not infallible.

The governor was under too much pressure to dwell on adversity. In early June he was censured by the Legislative Council in the unprecedented form of a vote of no confidence. The issue, which involved property rates, was of little significance constitutionally and the effect of the censure was merely symbolic. But in such a feverish atmosphere, symbolic gestures mattered. The episode served to remind the governor that the independence of Hong Kong's legislators, for which he had so ardently proselytised, could backfire on him personally. With the vote on his reform package only three weeks away, anything that could undermine his authority was a potential threat to its passage. In this case he was quick to turn the setback to his advantage, using his question time at LegCo to declare, 'I will always defend the right of this council to criticise the government and the governor. I hope we can take this for granted after 1997.'

In the days leading up to the anniversary of Tiananmen Square, Beijing's 'friends', led shamelessly by the former prime minister Sir Edward Heath, urged Hong Kong to forget the massacre or at least to reinterpret it less harshly. In his weekly column in the South China Morning Post, Tsang Yok Sing, the most politically sensitive of Beijing's allies in the colony, advised his readers not to 'reopen the wound'. It was all the more telling, therefore, when, in an interview for CNN on the eve of the vigil, he broke down in tears as he remembered how the entire school where he was headmaster had wept that day in 1989. The trauma of Tiananmen Square still echoed through all discourse about democracy in Hong Kong, and it was not only the democrats who were offended by the crass intervention of Heath and others.

Tsang Yok Sing, the leader of the DAB, was born in Hong Kong in 1947 and educated at the colony's leading Roman Catholic school, St Paul's College. He went on to study at the University of Hong Kong, where he became caught up in the high drama of the Cultural Revolution. With his brother, Tsang Tak Sing, he helped to organise the student demonstrations against the British which erupted in the riots of 1967 and nearly brought colonial rule to a premature end. The authorities had been obliged to fall back on the draconian powers embodied in the Emergency Regulations, yet even these measures would not have prevailed had it not been for a simultaneous instruction

from the Beijing Maoists to their Hong Kong cadres calling a halt to the uprising. The repressive methods adopted by the British, which led to Tsang Tak Sing being jailed for two years, confirmed his brother's antipathy towards colonial rule and his intellectual commitment to Marxism. Although Tsang Yok Sing was always to insist that he never joined the Communist party (which was, and remained, outlawed in Hong Kong), he soon established himself as one of the most loyal supporters of Beijing in the colony. In 1969 he became a mathematics teacher at the Pui Kiu Middle School, one of more than a dozen 'patriotic' schools. He took over as principal in 1986, by which time he had already been appointed by the politburo in Beijing as a delegate to the People's Congress in Guangdong.

The Tiananmen Square vigil, on 4 June in Victoria Park, took place only three weeks before the LegCo vote on Patten's reforms, which gave it a particular poignancy. It was a wet night, and a crowd of over 30,000 sat on plastic sheets or newspapers holding lighted candles protected by rice-paper shades. At a crescendo in the music the candles were held aloft and glittered through the rain across the park. The quiet resolution of the people affected even the most hardened observers, and it was impossible to conclude that the hunger for freedom and democracy in Hong Kong was a popular spasm exploited by irresponsible elements among the colony's chattering classes. Edward Llewellyn, the governor's political adviser, was spotted watching from the sidelines by a reporter from Ming Pao. The pro-Beijing Wen Wei Po picked this up and inevitably saw in the aide's presence a British plot. The following day the NCNA made two official complaints to the governor.

In the run-up to the decisive vote on Patten's reform package, Government House began to lobby intensively to secure its passage. To win, Patten needed at least half the votes in the sixty-seat council; to win convincingly he needed a big enough majority to offset the effect of the votes of three 'ex-officio' LegCo members (the chief secretary, the financial secretary and the attorney general) who, as government employees, were obliged to support the bill. With LegCo almost evenly split, the outcome hinged on a handful of wavering votes. These included those of the so-called 'Breakfast Group', an alliance of disparate interests featuring, among others, a senior executive of Jardine Matheson, Martin Barrow, who had a reputation for listening with very great care to his paymasters' voice; Hui Yin Fat, of the social workers' functional constituency; and Simon Ip, an amiable but lacklustre barrister who represented the legal profession on LegCo. Patten homed in on this group, joining them for breakfast on several occasions

to make his case. The task of corralling other floating votes was entrusted to Nicholas Ng, the constitutional affairs secretary, and his deputy, C.M. Leung, who spent long hours in the council antechambers openly lobbying against his adversaries in the Chinese camp.

Their job was made more difficult by the positions taken by Martin Lee and Emily Lau, the governor's two most impressive but unpredictable allies on LegCo. Lau, the most forceful and eloquent politician in Hong Kong, had argued vigorously that the three government officials appointed to LegCo should be released from their obligation to support Patten to join her in voting against his package in favour of her own bill, which called for direct elections to all sixty LegCo seats. Her proposal was regarded by Patten, in the words of one of his staff, as 'not only crazy, but certain to send China berserk'. Nonetheless it had the potential, as a grand but futile gesture, to scupper his reforms by luring away one or more of the Democrats' crucial votes. Even more seriously, opponents of the Patten reforms, notably the pro-Beijing Liberals, might decide to vote for Emily Lau's 'impossibilist' bill to embarrass him. From the perspective of Government House, Emily Lau's perversity was matched by Martin Lee's failure to rally support for the governor. Although he had been surprised and delighted by the Patten proposals, he had yet to endorse them in public; formally, the Democrats were still committed to an increase in the number of directly elected seats for the 1995 elections from twenty to thirty. To Government House this seemed pointless, as Lee had made it quite clear privately that his party would in the end endorse Patten's reforms. 'Martin seems to be doing nothing,' one of the governor's aides complained in exasperation a few days before the crucial debate.

To complicate the process, there were fourteen amendments to Patten's bill, the most dangerous of which had been tabled by the Liberals. At first the governor's team took comfort from the fact that this attempt to redraft his package was so clumsy that even some in the pro-China camp were embarrassed by it. In seeking to scale down the functional constituencies, for example, Allen Lee had found himself proposing restriction of the franchise in one functional constituency to a maximum of 153 senior executives. Patten's allies were optimistic that none of the 'floaters' would be attracted by such blatant efforts to subvert the democratic process. Nonetheless, they knew that the pro-Beijing bloc in LegCo would throw its weight behind the Liberal amendment. If so, Patten would need to secure every last possible vote for his bill to survive more or less intact.

## I4

## 'INSIDE I'M CROWING LIKE MAD'

LegCo Votes on Patten's Reforms

On the eve of the vote on the Legislative Council (Electoral Provisions) (Amendment) Bill 1994, the outcome still hung in the balance. In Government House the mood was gloomy. Though even his closest colleagues did not know it, Patten believed that it would be impossible for his governorship to survive a defeat at the hands of the Liberals. Lavender, whose public performance as the governor's wife had earned her plaudits throughout Hong Kong and across the political spectrum, knew this, but kept her nerve. Although she did not volunteer strong opinions in public, she understood his predicament with clarity, and did not hesitate to express her thoughts within Government House. In this case, she shared her husband's view: he had invested too much of his reputation in his reforms for his credibility to withstand their defeat.

Behind the scenes Martin Lee was almost in despair at what he regarded as the governor's failure to secure enough support for his bill, and complained that he had only himself to blame. 'I told him he had to lobby hard, but I think he thought all would be fine. Now they appear to have only twenty-eight votes, and that is not enough. I am very unhappy, and very annoyed. He is supposed to have a good reputation for twisting arms. I just cannot believe he could not have done better.' If Patten were to lose the vote, he fretted, 'It would be the cruellest thing that could happen to Hong Kong. It would have been better if Wilson had remained, toeing his line of appeasement. We will have been betrayed.'

Within twenty-four hours of the decisive vote, it began to look as though the bill would fall. Not only had LegCo's pro-Beijing bloc

confirmed publicly that it would almost certainly support the Liberal amendment, but, despite Patten's breakfast appearances, the independents seemed likely to follow suit. The remaining waverers were wobbling so violently that it was impossible to tell which way they would eventually vote. One by one they were summoned to Government House to hear the governor make his case yet again. One or two of them indicated that he would have their vote; others listened intently but refused to declare themselves one way or the other. 'I've been Clintonising since the end of last week,' remarked Patten. 'I don't much like it. I'm not one of nature's whips. But there it is, it had to be done. I don't want to go through this again.'

At the eleventh hour, Martin Lee finally came to the governor's aid by agreeing to make a speech, at the request of Government House, in which he not only called on all instinctive democrats of whatever party to support the Patten proposals, but also named the remaining undecided voters who could tip the scales either way. In an intriguing development, he also undertook to lobby Lau Wong Fat, the deeply conservative leader of Heung Yee Kuk, a residents' association bloc from the New Territories, with whom he was deeply at odds on almost every issue. Indeed, his own amendment to the Patten bill proposed the abolition of Heung Yee Kuk's three seats in LegCo. Now, after much prompting from Patten, Lee promised that he would try to cut a deal with Lau Wong Fat by undertaking to withdraw this part of his amendment in return for a commitment from the Heung Yee Kuk leader that he and at least one of his colleagues would either vote against, or abstain on, the Liberal amendment.

On the night before the most crucial day in his political career, Chris Patten went to bed, well supplied with sleeping tablets, not knowing whether the next day would bring glorious victory or ignominious defeat.

The morning of 29 June 1994 began as usual for the governor with a workout on the tennis court. In his private office, his team vainly scoured the newspapers for developments. The only new story was in the Eastern Express, which reported that John Major had intervened to secure a crucial vote 'as the fate of Chris Patten's reform proposals hung in the balance'.

According to the Post, the prime minister had, in some unspecified way, persuaded Henry Keswick to secure the support of Martin Barrow, the Jardine Matheson executive on LegCo. The previous day, Barrow, whose own hostility to the Patten reforms was no secret, had suddenly upset all calculations by announcing that he would not after

all be supporting the Liberal amendment of which he himself was a principal architect. When Patten arrived in the office, he dismissed the report. He had, he said, himself momentarily considered ringing the Jardine chairman, but had managed to resist the temptation. 'Hand on heart, I did not call Henry. I just thought it would put me in the position of a supplicant.' Barrow, too, insisted that it was his 'personal' decision. 'It was going to be such a dead-heat situation. I didn't think that I should be the one with the casting vote.' Yet it was widely presumed that Barrow would not have switched his loyalties so suddenly without instructions from his chairman. Despite Keswick's falling-out with Patten, Jardine Matheson was a significant contributor to Conservative party funds, and the family was believed to maintain close links with the government, not least through Keswick's wife, Tessa, who was the political adviser to the chancellor of the exchequer, Kenneth Clarke.

Whatever the truth, Allen Lee, who had been relying on Barrow's support for his Liberal amendment, was furious, though less with Barrow than with the governor. Before announcing his decision, the Jardine executive had rung the Liberal party leader to break the news of his defection. According to Lee, Barrow was reticent about his change of heart.

He told me he had changed his mind for personal reasons, and that it had nothing to do with the governor, but I couldn't get any explanation. We've been working on this for two weeks. He was instrumental in designing our package. He had devised a lobbying plan; he told us how to lobby Chinese support and how to lobby local support; he told us who we had to discuss our plan with in Beijing, and that this was the way to secure the support of pro-China legislators here . . . He was working with us day and night. Now, at the last moment, he drops out. There must be a reason . . . Somebody must have got to him. I told him, 'Martin, your heart must be bleeding.'

Allen Lee, never known to understate a case, claimed that Patten's lobbying tactics had been excessively brutal. 'Their limbs have been taken off by the governor. He is twisting their arms and legs . . . Is this fair? Is this British politics? Is this letting the Hong Kong people decide? We had thirty votes; now the fate of Hong Kong is being changed by one man. I've never seen anybody operating like that.'

Edward Llewellyn acknowledged that Government House had been like a whip's office on the previous day, and that Patten and his advisers

had managed to 'square' Martin Barrow. While the governor admitted that he had lobbied 'vigorously', if with some distaste for the process, he was adamant that the proprieties had been scrupulously observed.

I can say hand on heart that we didn't promise anybody anything and we didn't threaten anybody. What we said was that we thought that a defeat would be extremely bad for the authority of the government; that it wouldn't end the political argument; that . . . it would make sure the argument rumbled on for the next two or three years with the pro-democracy politicians becoming increasingly difficult to handle. Why? Because they would feel, understandably, that they'd been robbed.

After breakfast, Patten's team huddled in the private office to project the impact of Barrow's about-turn. At first, on the basis of the latest reports from LegCo, it looked as though they were likely to scrape home with a 28-25 majority. Mike Hanson announced, to no one in particular, 'We've got it in the bag.' It was soon clear that his optimism was premature.

The debate began at 9am but it was expected to be at least ten hours before the crucial vote on the Liberal amendment was taken. With television and radio coverage of the proceedings droning in the background, Martin Dinham and Edward Llewellyn orchestrated the last-minute effort to keep the wavering legislators on side. But despite the assiduous lobbying of Nicholas Ng and C.M. Leung, at least three of them were still under intense pressure to abstain or vote against the Patten proposals, not only from their colleagues but, as it soon transpired, directly from Beijing. Patten's support was starting to crumble.

China's original tactic had been to remain aloof from the proceedings. But in the days leading up to 29 June, in the wake of the Barrow-inspired efforts of the Liberals, the Chinese had shifted their ground. Not only had Lu Ping issued his allies on LegCo with instructions to support Allen Lee's amendment, but now, on the day itself, he was secretly lobbying himself. In perhaps the most breathtaking attempt to destroy Patten's reforms, the now London-based chairman of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, Sir William Purves, also chose this moment to turn against the governor. The previous day, a respected member of LegCo, Vincent Cheng, who was on the board of the bank, told Government House that he had decided to abstain on the Liberal amendment. Now, twelve hours later, with the debate underway, he rang both Dinham and Nicholas Ng in some distress to tell them that he had come under great pressure from Purves to switch his

vote in favour of the amendment and felt obliged to do so. Purves had, Cheng reported, made it clear to him that 'his job was on the line'. Purves's call had been followed up by another from Lu Ping. Patten knew that Purves had seen Lu Ping the previous day and half suspected that the two men were even now in the same office. He was aghast. 'That's Willie Purves, true to the last,' he said contemptuously. Later, still angry, he was more explicit:

The Hong Kong Bank owes something to Hong Kong . . . the chairman of the Hong Kong Bank was a member of my Executive Council when we were first pushing these proposals and knew about them before they were announced . . . but the most disgraceful aspect of this is that someone can phone up an employee on an open line from Peking and tell that employee how to vote. What's the employee supposed to say, knowing perfectly well that the phone call is probably being listened to? It is mind-boggling.

When Lavender Patten walked into the private office and heard the news, she spat, 'Bloody traitor,' before recovering her poise. An aide spluttered: 'If we win, we'll get him for this.'

Vincent Cheng's defection was likely to influence other undecided legislators to follow; and by mid-morning, Hanson was obliged to adjust his optimistic forecast. 'Down in the hothouse of LegCo, four or five votes are dodging around quite a bit. They keep changing their minds. At the moment we don't know which way it's going to go. It's very, very close.' In Government House, the atmosphere became more and more oppressive: faces were drawn and anxious; fingers drummed on desks against the background babble of the televised debate.

A little later, news came through of another intervention from Beijing. Lu Ping had been on the phone again, this time to Hui Yin Fat, the elected representative of the functional constituency representing the social workers. This time, however, Dinham was able to confirm: 'Hui has told Lu Ping to get lost, I'm glad to say.' According to Dinham, Lu Ping had urged Hui Yin Fat to abstain. 'All I ask of you,' the Beijing official had said, 'is that you leave the chamber when they vote.' Hui Yin Fat apparently had the courage to retort, 'I am not prepared to do that.' Another of Patten's aides reported that the legislator felt under such pressure that he had hidden himself away in his office, refusing to take calls from anyone.

Lu Ping tried the same tactic with one of Hui Yin Fat's colleagues, Pan Chung Hoi, urging him: 'I don't care what you do. Just go to the toilet if necessary when the vote is cast.' Pan Chung Hoi, too, stood firm.

Patten mused: 'What's it going to be like after 1997? They won't have to make phone calls from Peking to get them to vote the right way then. Just a local call.' 'And they are free,' quipped Dinham.

Lavender Patten sat in the private sitting room upstairs. The last week or two, she reflected, had been testing.

I try to give Chris a little bit of reassurance if I can, but it is very hard. I can't reassure him that the votes are there if they aren't. So I suppose all I can really do is say to him, 'There is still time to capture the votes, and we'll deal with what happens if we don't win afterwards.' There's no need to anticipate disaster, because that can paralyse you. But it's easy to say that, and impossible for him not to think about the effects if it goes the wrong way . . . I've got to support him and not panic. I wouldn't be much good to him if I was screaming . . . Who knows, perhaps by this time next week we will have retired.

By lunchtime, the figures were looking bad. All hope of a three-vote majority had now evaporated, and defeat seemed to beckon. Edward Llewellyn, who was keeping a running tally, estimated that the race was neck and neck at 27-27. Patten's survival now appeared to depend on Martin Lee's ability to deliver his deal with Lau Wong Fat of Heung Yee Kuk. If this were to collapse, one horrified aide whispered, 'It's awful, we fall.' Llewellyn hurried to warn Patten, who had temporarily retired to his study.

Unhappily, Martin Lee's flair as an advocate was not matched by his skill as a broker. It rapidly became clear that his efforts were foundering. In the early hours of the morning, the leader of the Democrats had finally persuaded his own colleagues to accept the proposed trade-off with Lau Wong Fat. As the morning wore on, however, Allen Lee had discovered what was afoot and had threatened that unless the Heung Yee Kuk leader and his colleagues voted for the Liberal amendment, the Liberals would themselves vote to abolish his functional constituency, and thereby his seat on LegCo.

Incomprehensibly, Martin Lee, apparently believing that he could afford to increase the pressure on Lau Wong Fat, chose this moment to jettison the deal which he had persuaded his colleagues to endorse only a few hours earlier. Not content with an abstention, he now demanded that Lau Wong Fat and his colleagues vote against Allen Lee's amendment. This was a miscalculation. In high indignation, Lau Wong Fat broke off negotiations. When news of this reached Government House, Patten was almost speechless with frustration. 'Martin is mad,' he expostulated. 'It really is like trying to deal with the
