but finally they all drifted away, leaving Burnside, Halleck, and the two department heads to discuss business.

Burnside began by repeating his assessment that he was not fit for so large a command, while many others beneath him were. Halleck waved his objections aside rather impatiently, however, and invited him to reveal the details of his Fredericksburg plan. After the new commander had done that, Halleck presented his arguments against it. Perhaps to Halleck's surprise, and certainly to his consternation, General Haupt preferred Burnside's proposal. They discussed it into the early hours. The next morning Halleck wired Washington for the pontoons, in case the campaign were decided upon; then he, Haupt, and Meigs went back to the capital, where Halleck remained as lukewarm over the idea as he had been about McClellan's, on his return from the Harrison's Landing conference. Haupt still favored it, though; considering that Lincoln ultimately approved it, the quartermaster general must have offered no serious objections. $^{28}$

Halleck forwarded the president's consent November 14. Lincoln felt confident of success if Burnside moved quickly, Halleck commented, "otherwise not." Burnside already understood the need for rapid movement: before nightfall his first units had orders to march.

Only that day, Burnside had reorganized the Army of the Potomac into his image of a more manageable weapon. He grouped the six corps gathered about Warrenton into three McClellanlike wings: the Left Grand Division, as he called it, consisted of the First and Sixth corps, under William Franklin; the Center Grand Division was made up of the newly arrived Third Corps and the Fifth Corps, placed under Joe Hooker if only because his rank required a command of such stature; and the Second and Ninth corps constituted the Right Grand Division, with sixty-five-year-old Edwin Sumner in charge. Though technically under Burnside's orders, Franz Sigel's Eleventh Corps remained behind, outside Washington. $^{29}$

It was "Bull" Sumner's right wing that led off early on November 15. The Confederates detected his movement and ineffectually shelled his trains, but Sumner pushed his men hard, his infantry struggling cross-country while his supply wagons and artillery filled the roads.

Before letting Sumner go, Burnside sent his staff engineer to check on those pontoons again. It was only after Sumner was on his way, though, that word came back from Washington of a delay in the plan

Burnside and Halleck had agreed upon. Burnside expected Halleck to take care of such details when he returned to his Washington office: after all, the engineer brigade was in Washington, while Burnside would be fifty miles away and on the move, out of telegraphic reach. Unfortunately, though McClellan had ordered the pontoons to Washington the day before he was relieved, most of them were still on the upper Potomac when Burnside's man inquired about them nine days later. That was Henry Halleck's fault; he had not made his own engineer officer privy to the importance of the bridges, nor had he followed their progress. They were supposed to have been on their way to Falmouth by the morning of November 15, but the commander of the engineer brigade--Daniel Woodbury--could not now promise to even start them until November 17. That, too, turned out to be overly optimistic. Woodbury (the same man who had led the flanking column astray at First Bull Run) might have deduced that some schedule depended upon the pontoons when Halleck specifically instructed him to telegraph news of their departure, but the principal blame rested with Halleck. $^{30}$

The Confederates were now aware of the movement toward the Tide-water, Lee already guessing that Fredericksburg might be the destination, so it was too late to simply call Sumner back. Fredericksburg was in enemy control, as well as Falmouth and Aquia Creek; therefore it would not be a bad idea to have Union infantry there ahead of the pontoons, which Burnside could still expect as early as November 19. Still, he held the rest of his army at Warrenton a couple of days longer, to give his opponent room to doubt his intentions.

The officer in charge of the pontoons ran into more trouble. An officious quartermaster department, from which he needed horses, harness, and teamsters, put him off. Woodbury, still unaware the movement requiring his pontoons had already begun, dutifully telegraphed that the departure would be delayed at least until November 18. It was ultimately not until November 19 that the first bridge train left Washington. By that time, Sumner had been in front of Fredericksburg a day and a half. He drew his two corps up along Stafford Heights, opposite the city, to await the pontoons and the balance of the army.

Burnside rode in on the nineteenth. Sumner asked permission to cross at one of the fords upstream, but Burnside shook his head. As much as he wanted to occupy Fredericksburg in its meagerly defended condition, the ford Sumner spoke of had been described as impassable for

infantry and artillery; even if he could swim a sufficient force of cavalry across, it might quickly become stranded. Instead, Burnside dashed off a note to Halleck, reminding him--among other things--of the missing pontoons. $^{31}$

A year later, Halleck tried to wriggle from beneath his considerable share of the responsibility by arguing that Burnside had verbally agreed to travel on the south bank of the Rappahannock all the way from his position near Warrenton. Such an idea was preposterous. Apparently there had been discussion, during the command conference at the Warrenton Hotel, of crossing a portion of the army well above Fredericksburg; but even if Halleck had construed that to mean the entire army would cross, he ought to have recognized the dangerous supply situation that would have resulted. As it was, Burnside opted against fording even a small force, for fear of having it isolated and destroyed. The Rappahannock was known to rise quickly in a storm, as Burnside had been somewhat redundantly warned by an officer who had also been there the previous summer. Rain came quickly and furiously in a Virginia winter, and the Army of the Potomac was already suffering enough from shortages of food and forage without putting an impassable river across the difficult roads faced by the teamsters.

Burnside's wisdom in keeping to the north bank was borne out before he established his headquarters adjacent to Fredericksburg. The night of November 18 a heavy rain began to fall, continuing throughout the next day and--with even greater force--into the twentieth. Had he permitted any unit to cross, it would have been trapped. $^{32}$

Though the storm had already begun, Hooker proposed crossing his grand division at United States Ford and sweeping south, alone, toward Richmond. A number of people supposed Burnside's appointment over the army was only meant to be temporary, until Hooker had sufficiently recovered from his Antietam wound to assume the command. Evidently Joe Hooker was one of those who thought that, and in order to assist the prophecy he did not wait for Burnside's response to his proposal, writing directly to the secretary of war to suggest arrangements, taking the opportunity to criticize his commanding officer's management of the change of base. Burnside, unaware of Hooker's insubordinate intrigue, rejected his plan as diplomatically as possible: considering Hooker's poor showing with the entire army in a similar campaign the next spring, it was just as well he did. $^{33}$

The storm came and passed, the rivers rose, and still they had no sign of the pontoons. Burnside wrote Halleck again on the twenty-second to say he was no longer so confident of success. Confederate soldiers moved into camp beyond Fredericksburg in ever-greater numbers, while the Union army sat idle, unable to cross a man. By November 21, the city's original little garrison had been reinforced by two divisions of Long-street's corps.

One pontoon train, sent by land, became mired in the storm, wallowing a mere five miles a day. At the Occoquan progress stopped entirely until engineers rebuilt the bridge, after which they divided the train, sending half of it on to Falmouth by land and half to Belle Plain, on Potomac Creek, behind a tug. Other bridge materials went by barge directly from Washington to Belle Plain and Aqua Creek. The first to reach the vicinity of the Army of the Potomac arrived at Belle Plain November 22, but the major in charge there knew no more of the need for dispatch than had his superiors; therefore, when the quartermaster department again neglected to supply teams and drivers on demand, the major waited patiently until they were provided. Between that delay and emergency road repairs, he did not deliver that partial bridge to Falmouth until the afternoon of November 24. $^{34}$

Meanwhile, Burnside fell into a blue mood while his staff fumed. One officer went up to Aquia Creek looking for pontoons but found only General Woodbury, who had none. The staff knew their commander was not at fault, but knew equally well that he would catch the blame for the setback they had all begun to anticipate. They were quite right: as early as November 24, only ten days after he had approved Burnside's plan of campaign, President Lincoln lamented privately to one of Sigel's generals that his new army commander seemed no faster than his old one. $^{35}$

Concerned about the army's hesitation, Lincoln made arrangements to meet his general aboard the steamer Baltimore November 26, in the middle of Aqua Creek. Burnside's secretary went aboard the boat with him, but no one witnessed his conclave with the president. Burnside complained of the missing pontoons, a few of which began to appear only now, after Longstreet's entire corps had occupied the opposite bank. Lincoln had a plan to put a corps or more of reinforcements ashore at Port Royal, well downstream, and a similar force of new troops on the north bank of the Pamunkey River, backed by gunboats. These two

could converge at or behind Fredericksburg while Burnside attacked head-on. It was not bad strategy, as it could prevent Lee from falling back on Richmond while forcing him to abandon his lines at Fredericksburg. Still, Burnside feared it would take too long to gather and deploy the other columns, which would put the campaign too far into winter; Halleck wanted Burnside to attack as soon as possible, or so he implied. Lincoln responded that he, as president, was in charge of such decisions, rather than Halleck. He added that Burnside might wait until he was ready: both he and the country were prepared to be patient. They parted with the understanding that Halleck would review the plan. He did, and he objected for the same reason as Burnside, so Lincoln shelved the idea. $^{36}$ Who, Burnside might then have wondered, was in charge now? And what did this say about the patience of either the country or the administration?

Burnside returned to Falmouth by omnibus and train the next day. On foot, and without the slightest indication of his rank, he waded through the mud from the depot to his headquarters with no entourage save his ubiquitous secretary--not the way George McClellan would have come back to camp.

He met good news, for once: his wife had reached Belle Plain by ship the previous evening. He immediately saddled a horse and rode to meet her for a Thanksgiving celebration. $^{37}$

By now, Stonewall Jackson's corps of the Confederate army had started to Fredericksburg from the Shenandoah Valley. Burnside began to wonder whether he ought to provide for an alternate crossing; finally he did, choosing Skinker's Neck, more than a dozen miles below Fredericksburg. Preparations there, however, soon prompted Lee to send Jackson's corps in that direction, and before long the enemy had intimidating defenses in that location. The site had other limitations as well: fourteen miles of unimproved roads posed a major problem for the engineer, artillery, and supply wagons at that time of year, not to mention the infantry. It rained a light drizzle all of December 1, and for the next three days warm sun thawed each night's frozen mud; December 5 a drenching storm turned from rain to snow, and the roads became quagmires. Then came a hard freeze of three days' duration, followed by two relatively warm days that once again liquified the road system.

General Franklin believed it would be possible to cross at Skinker's Neck, but he expressed grave misgivings about advancing from there,

with such strong positions as the enemy had for defending the neck. Taking all of this into consideration, Burnside determined at some time in early December to abandon that route and to bridge the river at the point where Lee would least expect it--smack in front of Fredericksburg, the most difficult spot. General Sumner had entertained reservations about that when the army first reached Falmouth: he feared bridging the river before Confederate artillery and Southern marksmen, posted in the houses along the waterfront. He suggested spanning the river below town, guarding the bridgehead with a shield of thirty heavy guns, and turning Lee's right by marching the entire army around it. Burnside eventually decided upon an amalgamation of his own plan and the one Sumner offered. The Union army would cross both at and below town, simultaneously driving at the enemy with a frontal assault and curling his right flank backward. He reasoned that the surprise crossing alone would catch the Confederates with half their forces a dozen miles away, at which the Army of the Potomac could leap between the two halves and defeat them in detail. $^{28}$

Wherever it was to be done, Burnside felt compelled to attack somewhere, no matter how much patience the president professed: however prudent it might be to withdraw into winter quarters, the newspapers had denounced McClellan for doing so the previous year, and even Lincoln had joined in the chorus. McClellan's hesitation after Antietam had resurrected the journalistic tirade, and his removal implied the administration's recognition that the country wanted action. Editors were already urging Burnside to attack at once--editors who were friendly both to Lincoln and Burnside. There was also a psychological need within the army itself for some sort of offensive campaign. An officer who had been with Burnside in North Carolina evinced concern over army morale just as (though not because) McClellan was removed. "The men in the old regiments here are not very sanguine of success," he wrote home. "The general opinion is that if we don't take Richmond by spring the Southern Confederacy is a fixed fact." $^{29}$ The continued success and survival of the Army of Northern Virginia contributed to that attitude, and the Emancipation Proclamation may even have aggravated it. Those who had not sought to destroy slavery might have concluded the war needed to be won by January 1, to avoid the effects of the proclamation; the abolition-minded probably expected those War

Democrats in the army to cease giving their best effort after the first of the year, and they may have hoped for a battle on that account.

Discontent, however, was not limited to the prosecution of the war. To some degree--though not to that claimed subsequently--the men in the ranks had doubts about Ambrose Burnside's ability. A recruit in Rush Hawkins's 9th New York, who perhaps reflected a trickling-down of disrespect from the insufferable Hawkins, greeted the change of command with the comment that "Burnside has done well thus far but nothing to prove himself capable of maneuvering our 'Grand Army' successfully." The same lack of confidence in the upper echelons may have derived from the fact that Burnside had comparatively little military experience. Of his three grand division commanders, Hooker and Franklin had graduated from West Point years before Burnside, Franklin first in his class, and Sumner had been an officer long before Burnside was born. Four of the six corps commanders had preceded him at the Point, and Willcox had been ahead of him in the same class. More than two-thirds of the division commanders had also graduated before him, most of them having fought in Mexico and remained in the service ever since. Burnside's five years as a lieutenant had availed him only one brush with Apaches, even if he did get an arrow in the neck. $^{40}$ McClellan had been almost as junior among the West Pointers, but he had been next to the top of his class, had distinguished himself in Mexico, and had been out of the army but four years when the war began. He had, besides, exuded confidence. Burnside wore his heart on his sleeve, and his heart just then was very heavy.

A few days before he expected to throw his forces across the river, the commanding general learned of serious dissension among his subordinates. Hooker had already denounced Burnside's strategy, and at least among the corps and division commanders of Sumner's Right Grand Division there was almost unanimous disapproval of the plan to attack the enemy through Fredericksburg.

Burnside called Sumner's generals together at their grand division headquarters, in the largest room of the stately Lacy mansion, and outlined just what he planned to do: cross at and just below Fredericksburg in two columns, attacking both Marye's Heights, behind the city, and the Confederate right, below town, before Jackson's corps could reach the battlefield. He mentioned that he had heard of considerable

disagreement with this plan and reprimanded the officers for "throwing cold water" on his operation.

General Sumner, who had sent the private note but had said nothing else against the proposed crossing, pledged himself to unquestioning obedience, as did Darius Couch, the Second Corps commander, who had openly objected to the idea. One by one, the other generals offered cheerful cooperation, regardless of their differences, and the meeting ended amiably enough. $^{41}$ Burnside had managed to quell the contention that threatened his position as commander of the army, but he had confirmed his suspicion that his subordinates were not terribly enthusiastic. For all their protestations to the contrary, he had good reason to believe their discouragement would infect the troops. And then of course there was Hooker, who had not recanted.

General Meade thought, with good cause, that Burnside's problem with his commanders was of his own manufacture, resulting from his frequent expressions of self-doubt. It mattered little whether that doubt was well founded: in the cutthroat atmosphere of the Army of the Potomac, merely letting it slip as much as fulfilled the prophecy. No one will ever know whether, under less antagonistic circumstances, Burnside could have handled the army efficiently. He was not a man afraid of doing things: he risked everything in business, lost, and eventually began anew; he recorded no qualms about going to sea with fifteen thousand men and scores of ships under his responsibility; nor, later in his career, did he shy away from deliberately jeopardizing himself and his command at Knoxville, to lure Longstreet away from Chattanooga. These undertakings required great personal confidence. Yet he seemed to dread stepping up from command of a wing to that of the army, and his native modesty and honesty led him to confide to several officers his belief that he could not manage it. There would have been nothing wrong with that in an army made up of men like himself, who stood ready to give their all to any man invested with the authority, whatever he said of himself. But here in Virginia Union generals were accustomed to looking out for themselves, covering their mistakes and carpeting their way to promotion with the shrouds of other men's reputations. Rather than endearing himself to his immediate subordinates (Sumner and a few others excepted), his admissions of doubt merely made him an easy mark for them and undermined any capacity he brought to the job. Few generals associated with him at Fredericksburg or afterward, wher-

ever success was not complete, failed to relieve themselves of blame by pointing a finger at Burnside. $^{42}$

In addition to the liability of certain officers who had little faith in him, Burnside carried an invisible but nonetheless burdensome weight of stress during the Fredericksburg campaign. Except for the trouble at Hatteras Inlet, the rigors of the North Carolina operation had been as nothing compared to the difficulties Burnside had endured since joining the Army of the Potomac. From July he had been subjected to an unusual amount of strain, and in the weeks preceding Fredericksburg the pressure became enormous. He had, at least once, been forced to visit his old friend McClellan with instructions to get Little Mac's army moving or, according to one source, supplant him as its chief. His devotion to McClellan made either chore painful, and he must also have suffered from McClellan's hinted-at suspicion that Burnside and the administration were conspiring against him. $^{43}$ July had also been the month of the steam-and-rail marathon up and down the East Coast, ending in Burnside's first assignment to Fredericksburg, where he arrived with an eruption of erysipelas so severe it flattened him. The skin disorder itself may have been a physical manifestation of accumulating stress.

Throughout the balance of August Burnside had had to picket most of the Rappahannock River with a single division, isolated most of the time from the protection of the main armies. The withdrawal from Falmouth had been something of a nightmare, with the specter of Lee's victorious battalions driving his troops into Aquia Creek, and the Antietam campaign had begun but a few days later. The physical attrition of another fortnight of active campaigning, two battles, and the deaths of two close friends immediately preceded the sensitive relations that developed between himself and McClellan, which continued through the next six weeks of what ought to have been relaxing camp routine. Unwilling to aggravate the rift in their friendship with a defense of his conduct at Antietam, Burnside was forced to watch his reputation sacrificed by McClellan's partisans, whose private gossip already foretold Burnside as the scapegoat there. In mid-October Burnside's medical director and personal friend, Dr. Church, wrote him to warn that he needed rest, reminding him that since the summer of 1861 he had not enjoyed one day of complete repose--"one day of relief from anxious thought & severe labor"--while most other generals had spent at least a couple of weeks or months at Washington or some other restful spot behind the lines.

Church suggested that Burnside had already begun to collapse when he added, "But for your great powers of endurance you would probably have broken down before this."44

It was in this sorely depleted condition that Burnside unhappily accepted responsibility for the Army of the Potomac. Summoning reserves of energy, he formulated and commenced a vigorous campaign that brought the army to Falmouth, then fretted for days as the negligence of others scuttled his grand design. Gathering himself for still another effort by way of Skinker's Neck, he was again frustrated by the weather and the arrival of Jackson's troops. Falling back to the original plan as a last resort, he encountered the almost solid opposition of his subordinates. Each of these operations consumed a massive amount of thought and preparation, and the successive discouragements must have been psychologically devastating to a man who felt he must do something and do it quickly.

Added to the emotional havoc wrought by his exertions was a noticeable physical deterioration. Due at least partly to his disinclination to delegate authority, Burnside had been working feverishly at all hours since General Buckingham consigned him that accursed appointment. General Howard noted that Burnside's first two nights as army commander were almost sleepless. Daniel Larned, his faithful secretary, complained that Burnside worked continually, day and night, sleeping little, ignoring his personal health, and Larned ominously mentioned at one point, "The general has been sick since he took command." While McClellan had screened himself from interruptions with a headquarters guard, Burnside scorned such pretensions and so suffered from an endless cycle of importuning visitors who distracted him and disturbed his rest.[45] The toll is evident in his photographs. The images of Burnside before he took command show determination and vigor; photographs taken afterward reveal a droopy sort of resignation, the eyes tired and dull, the famous whiskers heavily salted with grey.

The lack of sleep alone would have felled a less vibrant man in days, and anxiety over the support of subordinates only added to the strain; it is thus not surprising that most observers have misread the facts and credited Burnside with crumbling under the burden, yet he did not. He contrived a plan that should have worked, and modified it serially as circumstances rendered elements of it obsolete. On the brink of exhaustion he conducted a battle he ought to have won, despite the

mistakes he made: a battle he would have won, but for the hesitation of his colleagues.

## II

The engineers of the Army of the Potomac began dragging their pontoons into the frigid waters of the Rappahannock at three o'clock on the morning of December 11. Ambrose Burnside was awake already when the hollow thumping of their hammers alerted the Confederate pickets; he had roused his provost marshal, Marsena Patrick, to discuss the day's arrangements. General Patrick had commanded a brigade at Fredericksburg during most of the summer, and much of Burnside's information was based on Patrick's knowledge of the terrain. His old brigade would provide the guides for today's work. $^{1}$

The bridge builders broke into two distinct teams: Woodbury's volunteer engineers started a couple of spans opposite Fredericksburg itself, while the Regulars worked more than a mile downstream, adjacent the plain below the city. Down at Skinker's Neck a regiment of Maine woodsmen had spent the whole night corduroying a thousand feet of road in an effort to decoy enemy troops in that direction. All three detachments suffered miserably in the severe cold. A half-inch of ice glazed the river, covering the entire breadth of the stream in some places, and the dampness of a heavy fog sank deep into aching bones.

At four o'clock the commanding general began composing attack orders for his grand division chiefs. They were simple to the point of vagueness, suggesting he had thoroughly reviewed the particulars with each of them in advance. Sumner and Hooker would cross into the city with the bulk of the army and carry Marye's Heights by sheer weight of numbers while Franklin followed the lower bridges onto the plain and moved "down the old Richmond road, in the direction of the railroad."² Franklin's goal at this point seemed twofold: to prevent Lee from stripping his right to reinforce Marye's Heights, and, if feasible, to turn the Confederate right as Sumner had previously advised. Burnside's orders do not specify that, but his description of Franklin's route suggests it. The Richmond road lay parallel to the railroad, and within Franklin's range there was no point at which it could be said to run "in the direction of the railroad." Just beyond Franklin's reach, though, a

local road branched off to Hamilton's Crossing; at least one of Franklin's generals misconstrued this as the highway to Bowling Green--the next town on the Richmond road--and it would appear that Burnside intended Franklin to follow that approach, which would have led him to the enemy's extreme right flank. $^{5}$

As clerks transcribed these orders, two signal guns echoed from Longstreet's front, beyond the city, warning the rest of the Southern forces the Yankees were finally coming across. For nearly three more hours the bridges crept steadily toward the indistinct city. Burnside had too much to do to think of it now, but his plan offered an opportunity for something of a clan gathering, for he was not the only Burnside who would participate in this battle. Going into its rifle pits behind Fredericksburg just then was the 3rd South Carolina Battalion, of Lafayette McLaws's division, which included Lieutenant A. W. Burnside; down at Port Royal, preparing to either defend Skinker's Neck or march to the fight at Fredericksburg, the 44th Georgia Infantry had an adjutant named Addison M. Burnside. It is doubtful that the general ever met these cousins, though he must have known their names through family letters, but it ought not to have surprised him to find representatives of his very Southern family in the Confederate service. $^{4}$

It was only by chance that the 3rd South Carolina Battalion did not join the troops guarding the Fredericksburg waterfront: for no particular reason, McLaws had chosen William Barksdale's brigade to picket the riverside and delay the crossing. So thick was the fog that Barksdale's Mississippi and Florida riflemen could not see the Union engineers until they came a few rods short of completing their bridges. When the dark, scrambling shapes finally did loom from the lowering warp, the range was too short to miss.

The first volley erupted about six o'clock, dropping numerous men from the 50th New York Engineers. The survivors disappeared behind the foggy curtain. Union infantry at the bridgeheads tried to lay a covering fire, but could not see where they were shooting. When the engineers ventured back out, their infantry supports had to cease fire to avoid hitting them. The unarmed carpenters had struck but few blows when another crackling of musketry drove them back again, leaving more dead and wounded behind.

Downriver, the other bridges progressed more rapidly. One of those at the lower end of town neared the far bank at eight-thirty, with only

token resistance, and the Regulars completed one of Franklin's by nine. Burnside seemed unwilling to jeopardize his army by crossing it all on that single lifeline, however. While Franklin might have crossed, wheeled to the right, and swept Barksdale from Fredericksburg, his left flank would have presented an inviting target for the Confederate artillery; the organization of his isolated force might also have disintegrated in the brushy ravines cut by Deep Run and Hazel Run. Burnside wanted both main bridges in place before he advanced (perhaps especially the upper set, that the trustworthy Sumner could reach any battle), and to disperse the enemy sharpshooters he ordered his artillery chief to open on the buildings. Artillerymen dragged three dozen fieldpieces down to the river's edge, from which they battered at the town for a while. When they ceased fire, General Woodbury gave it another try, but he could not coax his engineers back to work and so led a few score of infantry volunteers to the bridges, leading them personally. They had not even stepped on the planking when Southern marksmen shot some of them down. That was it for them; they refused to move another step, and Woodbury sent them back to their regiments.

It was almost noon now, the fog had lifted, and Burnside began to fret. His advantage of surprise was eluding him, and whatever portion of the Confederate army Lee had sent downstream would soon get wind of the Yankee ruse. With great regret he authorized Henry Hunt, his chief artilleryman, to pulverize the city. General Hunt had about 150 guns on Stafford Heights that would bear on the target, and shortly after midday he unleashed them all.

For two hours the heights belched fire at the empty homes and businesses along Water Street. Not a building in Fredericksburg escaped unscathed, but Barksdale's men holed up in the cellars and took the punishment well. At half past two the barrage ended and the cannon-ers retired, exhausted and somewhat deaf, while smoke and dust rose languidly from the rubble. Confident engineers then dashed out to finish their work, but they had hardly lifted their hammers when the deadly sniper fire began anew. Back scurried the construction crews, and the bridges dangled a few frustrating yards short of the city. $^{5}$

Henry Hunt had a better idea for cleaning out the hornets' nest. With the exasperated Burnside's permission he loaded some infantry into pontoons, sprinkled a few engineers among them for polemen, and sent them toward the opposite bank. The first detachment of engineer ferry-

men ran away, but more valiant gondoliers ferried across a few platoons of Michigan and Massachusetts troops--and a hundred New Yorkers at the lower end of town--who dashed at the troublesome buildings. They found streets barricaded by barrels filled with stones and earth, but the impromptu amphibious force formed ranks and confronted the Mississippians. The defenders fell back stubbornly. One sharp encounter occurred between opposing companies commanded by former Harvard classmates, ending only when the Confederate's colonel arrested him for ignoring an order to retreat. The street fighting went door-to-door until after dark, when Barksdale withdrew his brigade to the main line along Marye's Heights. $^{6}$

In the gathering darkness a brigade of the Ninth Corps thumped across the completed bridges and occupied the city. O. O. Howard's division of the Second Corps followed them, and one of Franklin's brigades crossed downstream.

For reasons he never explained, Burnside revised his orders to Franklin and Sumner now, directing them to keep the preponderance of their troops on the left bank of the river. The likeliest motive for this change would have been the fear that moving large columns into the city in the darkness would create confusion and crowding enough to invite an attack--an attack disorganized troops might not be able to resist. Additionally, Burnside may have hoped to keep the Confederate leaders off balance, creating the impression that the day's work had all been a diversion. In fact, Lee had not yet deduced his opponent's plan. As Burnside had reasoned (and as his grand division commanders had agreed), Fredericksburg was the least likely place to cross; Lee therefore could not believe he meant to strike there. That doubt had caused Lee to keep D. H. Hill's division at Port Royal and Jubal Early's near Skinker's Neck. $^{7}$ Still, it would have been better had Burnside crossed all his troops during the night and made a vigorous attack early in the morning, since his delay only gave Hill and Early even more time to come up.

The Union commander meditated the need to rearrange his plan to compensate for the delay in crossing. It might no longer do to simply rush across and break Lee's lines by main strength: more inspired tactics could be necessary.

In actual numbers, the Army of the Potomac enjoyed a considerable edge over the Army of Northern Virginia. Burnside's forces totaled

about 115,000 men of all arms, while Lee could only muster about 80,000. Lee's option to remain on the defensive seriously blunted that edge, as did the pressure to attack perceived by Burnside. One glaring deficiency in Burnside's army was the inexperience of so many of his men. He had, for instance, some 265 infantry regiments, most of which were sadly depleted by battle and months of disease and suffering, but 50 of these--and the largest of them, too--were brand-new units that had arrived since August. Most had never fired a shot or maneuvered under fire, and many had been with the army only a few days. A large number were short-term militia regiments. These novices could not have comprised fewer than 30,000 men. $^{8}$

Burnside worked on his tactical modifications well into the night. After midnight General Franklin sent a note to headquarters that mentioned concern for Burnside's rest (suggesting his fatigue was already noticeable), but the commanding general was still at work when Franklin's late message came in. At that time, Burnside still contemplated the simultaneous frontal attack at and below town, nothing more complicated than Sumner assaulting Marye's Heights while Franklin hammered the Confederate right. However late Burnside went to bed, he was awake again by four the following morning, sitting by General Patrick's cot. $^{9}$

At daylight the several bridges floating on the Rappahannock began to echo with the routestep thunder of 160,000 feet. The Second and Ninth corps rolled into the streets of Fredericksburg while the First and Sixth corps took position on the plain below town, separated from Sumner's Right Grand Division by two difficult streambeds. All morning the procession continued in thick fog.

In Fredericksburg, the soldiers stacked their arms in every thoroughfare. They broke ranks and began milling around, investigating the deserted houses, taking up a souvenir here and there, raiding pantries. The pillage soon escalated to the thievery of clothing, blankets, household furnishings, and family treasures; then it turned to wanton destruction. With the exception that the inhabitants had fled, it was like the sack of a medieval city: valuable books and colonial furniture went flying into the snowy streets; paintings were slashed with bayonets or cut from their frames and stuffed into knapsacks. A provost guard had to stand at every bridgehead to prevent troops from escaping to the rear with their loot. General Patrick personally laid his riding crop across
