```rst
1.1 check existence of supertype:
    <letter> (must exist as DEFINED)
        if not defined ----> reject specification

1.2 check existence of referenced entities:
    <product_agent>
        <client>

- if do not exist ----> generate meta-data for referenced
            entities as UNDEFINED entities:

                <product_agent> UNDEFINED static-entity
            properties: pa-name (type unknown)
                    pa-address (type unknown)

- if exist (UNDEFINED or defined)
            ----> check consistency of properties

1.4 add new UNDEFINED entities to list of UNDEFINED to be
     specified by user
       ----o---- ----o---- ----o---- ----o---
CHECKS ON UNDEFINED ENTITY

2.1 check existence of supertype:
    <person> (must exist as DEFINED)
        if not defined ---->, reject specification

2.2 check existence of referenced entities:
    NONE

2.3 check entities referring to it:
            <product-order-letter>
                --> a. check consistency of properties
                    client.c-name ; client.name
                    client.c-address ; client.add

                    NO NAME COMPATIBILITY-->
                    ERROR TO USER

                    b. if check a. OK:
                        ---> set status of <client> entity
                        to DEFINED

2.4 remove current entity from UNDEFINED
Tab. 1b)

```txt
< E_j > is-a ...;
    {aggregation-of
        {...
            P_j: view-of E_i with {P_i}
        }
    }
$P_{i}$ must exists.

Moreover, properties defined explicitly must be consistent with those of the undefined entity.

\- Accuracy rules are the basis for active design support functions provided by C-TODOS. In fact, their application detects design flaws that do not correspond to errors, but that might be inconsistencies, or that might represent undesired features of the target application (for example, because they influence parameters such as the performance of the target system).

For example, communication paths or document flows can be optimized if accuracy checks show that there exist elements of the schema that are bottlenecks for the activities performed in the application (for example, an object from which too many transitions depend). An other example of accuracy check regards the similarity of entities. The structural equivalence of entities may suggest a redundancy in the schema: the designer can decide to merge two similar specifications, or decide that the redundancy is useful and keep it.

Consistency checks are executed at various moments of the design:

- Upon insertion and deletion of specifications. These checks are executed automatically.  
- Upon completion of one design session. These permit to ensure the global consistency of one schema before passing it on to the prototyping phase and to the architecture selection phase (for example, no entity can remain undefined). Typically, accuracy rules are applied upon completion of a session.  
- On portions of the schema, or on groups of specifications. These checks can be initiated by the designer at any moment.

Consistency checks are implemented through the TODOS Query Language as queries on the conceptual schema; therefore, the Consistency Checking Module invokes the Query Module (Fig. 15).

## 3.3 Implementation Issues

C-TODOS has been implemented on a relational database system using the ORACLE DBMS $^{1}$ . The system is running on IBM AT-Class computers in the 640 Kbyte RAM/4Mbyte Fixed Disk configuration, under MS-DOS 3.11 $^{2}$ .

The relational implementation of the SDB consists of the following basic relations:

1. In the meta level of the SDB the ENTITY, the IS-A and STRUCTURE relations store information about the entities of the schema.

For example, the tuples generated by C-TODOS in the ENTITY relation from the specification of PRODUCT ORDER\_LETTER of Sect. 3.2 are shown in Tab. 2a.

The tuples that are generated in the IS-A relation are shown in Tab. 2b and the tuples generated in the STRUCTURE relation are shown in Tab. 2c.

2. In the meta-meta level of the SDB, the relations are divided into three groups: project management relations (such as ENTITY-HISTORY, SESSION-HISTORY, and SESSION-CHECKS-TO-BE-PERFORMED), relations that store the TCM concepts (META-ENTITY, META-IS-A, META-STRUCTURE), and relations that describe the relational schema (RELATIONS, ATTRIBUTES, DOMAINS, DOMAIN-VALUES).

For example, the tuples generated in the ENTITY-HISTORY relation when PRODUCT\_ORDER\_LETTER is defined are shown in Tab. 3a (we suppose the current design session is the 11th). The tuples generated in the ENTITY-INFORMATION relation are shown in Tab. 3b.

## 4 Interfaces of C-TODOS

In this section, we describe the interfaces that C-TODOS provides to its users for inserting, deleting, and inspecting the specifications contained in the SDB.

The insertion of specifications can be made in three different ways (see Fig. 15):

\- by using the TSL batch interface, the designer can enter specifications written in the TSL language. These specifications are first written using a text editor external to C-TODOS. They are then "compiled" by the TSL batch interface.

\- the TSL menu based interface allows the designer to insert specifications in a menu-driven fashion. This interface is particularly useful for inexperienced designers who are not familiar with the syntax of TSL.

\- the graphical interface is an easy-to-use interface which allows the designer to insert specifications by using the graphical notations presented in Sect. 2.

All the specifications inserted in the SDB are checked by the Consistency Checking module. At any moment in time, both the graphical and the TSL notations of a TCM entity are stored in C-TODOS in the Graphical Data Base (GDB) and the SDB respectively (see Fig. 17). This means, for instance, that the TSL representation of an entity is automatically produced by C-TODOS when the graphical representation is inserted.

The deletion of specifications is performed through the deletion module. Modification is supported through deletion and creation of the entity.

Inspecting specifications allows the designer to check the specifications stored in the SDB and to analyze them. This operation is performed through the query interface.

In the following, we focus on the graphical interface called G-TODOS (Graphical TODOS): it is illustrated in Sect. 4.1. Then we present in Sect. 4.2 the query interface provided by the Query Module.

ENTITY

<table><tr><td>entity-id</td><td>subschema</td><td>entity-name</td><td>specification-text</td></tr><tr><td>e1</td><td>static</td><td>document</td><td>!TSL-source-doc</td></tr><tr><td>e105</td><td>static</td><td>letter</td><td>!TSL-1</td></tr><tr><td>e106</td><td>static</td><td>product-order-letter</td><td>!TSL2</td></tr><tr><td>e107</td><td>static</td><td>product_agent</td><td>UD</td></tr><tr><td>e108</td><td>static</td><td>client</td><td>UD</td></tr><tr><td>e109</td><td>static</td><td>office-calendar</td><td>!TSL-source-cal</td></tr><tr><td>e110</td><td>static</td><td>client-letter</td><td>!TSL-source_clett</td></tr></table>

Tab. 2a)

IS-A

<table><tr><td>child</td><td>ancestor</td><td>level</td><td>condition</td></tr><tr><td>e106</td><td>e105</td><td>1</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>e106</td><td>e1</td><td>2</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>e105</td><td>e1</td><td>1</td><td>-</td></tr></table>

Tab. 2b)

<table><tr><td>prop-id</td><td>entity-id</td><td>lev0</td><td>lev1</td><td>prop-name</td><td>type</td><td>domain</td><td>value</td></tr><tr><td>p400</td><td>e106</td><td></td><td></td><td>logo</td><td colspan="2">simple image</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p401</td><td>e106</td><td></td><td></td><td>header</td><td colspan="2">simple text</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p402</td><td>e106</td><td></td><td></td><td>parameter</td><td colspan="2">aggr</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p403</td><td>e106</td><td>parameter</td><td></td><td>header</td><td colspan="2">aggr</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p404</td><td>e106</td><td>parameter</td><td>header</td><td>sender</td><td colspan="2">view</td><td>e107</td></tr><tr><td>p405</td><td>e106</td><td>parameter</td><td>header</td><td>receiver</td><td colspan="2">view</td><td>e108</td></tr><tr><td>p406</td><td>e106</td><td>parameter</td><td>header</td><td>current</td><td colspan="2"></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>-date</td><td colspan="2">ref</td><td>e109</td></tr><tr><td>p407</td><td>e106</td><td></td><td></td><td>contents</td><td colspan="2">simple text</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p408</td><td>e106</td><td></td><td></td><td>parameter</td><td colspan="2">aggr</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>p409</td><td>e106</td><td>parameter</td><td>contents</td><td>d</td><td colspan="2">ref</td><td>e110</td></tr><tr><td>p410</td><td>e106</td><td>parameter</td><td>contents</td><td>signature</td><td colspan="2">view</td><td>e107</td></tr></table>

Tab. 2c)  
Table 2: SDB relations in the meta level

ENTITY-HISTORY

<table><tr><td>entity-name</td><td>entity-id</td><td>insertion-session</td><td>deletion-session</td></tr><tr><td>product-order -letter</td><td>e106</td><td>11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>product_agent</td><td>e107</td><td>11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>client</td><td>e108</td><td>11</td><td></td></tr></table>

## 3a)

ENTITY-INFORMATION

<table><tr><td>entity-id</td><td>definition-state</td><td>author</td><td>comments</td></tr><tr><td>e106</td><td>YES</td><td>analyst-id</td><td>"answer to client"</td></tr><tr><td>e107</td><td>NO</td><td>analyst-id</td><td>"..."</td></tr><tr><td>e108</td><td>NO</td><td>analyst-id</td><td>"client will be a &lt;person&gt; object"</td></tr></table>

## 3b)

Table 3: SDB relations in the meta-meta level

## 4.1 G-TODOS: the C-TODOS Graphical Interface

G-TODOS is the graphical component of C-TODOS. It helps the designer in manipulating the office conceptual schema by providing an easy-to-use user interface based on graphical representations. These graphical representations give a global, synthetic view of all the entities of the conceptual schema; G-TODOS helps the designer in drawing the OIS schema and illustrating parts of it.

In the following of this section, we present the main features of G-TODOS and its functionalities for building and showing OIS schemas. G-TODOS has been developed on an IBM PC-AT. For a detailed presentation see (TODOS TR 2.4.1).

## a) G-TODOS main features

The location of G-TODOS within C-TODOS is shown in Fig. 17. G-TODOS provides input and output functionalities. More precisely:

\- the input functionalities concern the way the designer can graphically insert new entities in the SDB and modify existing ones through their structural representation. The G-TODOS submodule that handles the input included in (and is consistent with) the C-TODOS Modeling Module.

\- the output functionalities concern two aspects:

- G-TODOS can automatically produce three entity diagrams which correspond to synthetical information which is deduced from the content of the SDB.  
- G-TODOS allows the designer to inquiry the SDB using the C-TODOS Query Module, and to display the pictorial representation of the result on the screen. The corresponding G-TODOS submodule belongs to the C-TODOS Query Module.

Any diagram which is used in G-TODOS (either in input or in output) is stored by G-TODOS in a repository which is called the Graphical Data Base (GDB). This feature allows one to retrieve quickly any diagram in the state where it was created by the designer or produced by the tool. This improves the capability of the designer to analyze the OIS conceptual schema.

For all these functionalities, G-TODOS provides a homogeneous graphical interface for all manipulations. This user-friendly interface is based on windows and icons for displaying information, and on pop-up menus, keyboard and mouse for entering data. It provides graphical facilities for changing the drawings of graphical representations. G-TODOS also allows the designer to simultaneously see on the screen several views of the contents of the GDB by using a multi-windowing technique.

In the following, we analyze the input and output functionalities of G-TODOS.

## b) Graphical insertion

The goal of the G-TODOS insertion (and modification) module is to allow the designer to interactively build the graphical representation of an entity (or to modify it). In addition to the general G-TODOS interface, several facilities are provided by the graphical editor for achieving this goal:

- the designer is not bound to a too-strict sequence of manipulations for drawing the diagram,  
- the editor uses its knowledge of the TCM model semantics for executing automatic manipulations and avoiding errors,  
- G-TODOS ensures consistency between the GDB and the SDB.

These three facilities are now considered separately.

A flexible interface: Such an interface is characteristic of graphic interactive tools and is basic to enhancing the man-machine communications of G-TODOS. For example, using the mouse, the designer can create the new entity MEETING by selecting and executing menu lines of the "CREATE" pop-up menu (see Fig. 19a).

Then, in order to build the diagram pictured on Fig. 18b, the designer can start drawing either the 'is-a' or the reference link.

The designer is not limited by the size of the screen: he can use the scroll arrows to examine the whole diagram.

Knowledge of TCM semantics: This knowledge enables G-TODOS to perform automatic manipulations of the specifications. For example, upon movement of the symbol of CLIENT shown in Fig. 19a, G-TODOS rearranges the link between CLIENT and the 'cli' property symbol (see Fig. 19b).

This is performed because 'cli' and CLIENT are related and allowing CLIENT to be linked with no properties would be an error.

The knowledge of TCM also avoids design errors. For example, G- TODOS does not permit the designer to add an 'is-a' link over the 'cli' property: it is forbidden in TCM.

Another effect of the TCM knowledge availability is the use of the multi-windowing facility. Suppose the designer wants to see the structure of the CLIENT entity. G-TODOS allows him to display the corresponding diagram through a new window (Fig. 20).

This is feasible because G-TODOS knows that CLIENT is an entity and can therefore manage the correspondence with its graphical structure.

Fig. 20 also shows the is-a hierarchy on the screen. Some other windows (the reference network and the dynamic schema which have been automatically produced) have been opened by the designer but are not displayed on the screen, probably because of lack of place on the screen. It is possible to display each of them at any moment, thus displaying the window in the state where it was before being hidden.

Consistency: G-TODOS is globally coherent with C-TODOS. It performs the same consistency checks that the other input modules perform against the SDB.

Moreover, in order to make the GDB and the SDB consistent, we have chosen to make both the TSL textual and the graphical representations of any entity available at any moment.

This means that the TSL description of an entity is automatically produced by G-TODOS when the designer graphically inserts this entity. The graphical representation is generated when the designer uses the TSL batch or the menu based modules for entering an entity. The graphical representations of entities are not strictly equivalent to

the TSL specifications, because, as we mentioned in the previous sections, the graphical representation does not contain detailed information about domains. For example, in Fig. 21, the domains of the properties appear only in the TSL specification. Consequently, G-TODOS forces the designer to add the missing parts of the specifications. Upon termination of the insertion process, both the graphical representation and the missing parts are stored in the GDB.

## c) Using G-TODOS for graphical analysis

G-TODOS performs automatic production of graphical representations: G-TODOS produces three entity diagrams which are derived from the actual contents of the SDB:

- the Static-Reference Network (SRN: see Fig. 25), which represents all the entities which are connected by a reference link;  
- the is-a Hierarchy (IH: see Fig. 13b), which depicts all the entities and their generalization relationships,  
- the Dynamic Schema (DYN: see Fig. 12b), as presented in Sect. 2.

The production of graphical representations creates a version of a diagram from the state of the SDB at any moment when the designer activates this process. The process is not interactive and is highly time consuming.

The generation algorithms place the graphic symbols at some appropriate locations, and draw arcs between them. Some aesthetic criteria are taken into account. For instance, in the Dynamic Schema, two layout criteria are the following:

- the message symbols must be placed on the border of the picture, without any line which is drawn "behind" them.  
- the lines of actions should traverse one another only when necessary.

G-TODOS allows the designer to modify the layout of the produced diagram, in order to let him place and arrange the graphical symbols to his taste. The produced diagrams can also be displayed on the screen at any moment. For this facility, the designer can use all the functionalities of G-TODOS interface such as multi-windowing and symbol movement. In particular, each diagram can be printed at any moment, which allows the designer to maintain the documentation of the conceptual design phase.

## 4.2 Querying the SDB

Queries to retrieve information about the OIS conceptual schema stored in the SDB can be performed at several points during a design session, as an aid for the designer to retrieve already defined specifications and to check the completeness and consistency of the OIS schema being created: when elaborating new specifications, inserting specifications, at the end of a design session.

While defining elements of the OIS schema, the designer may be interested in knowing which element types have already been defined. It may be interesting to aggregate office conceptual elements according to different points of view: list actions performed

by a given agent, list documents with non textual parts, list subtypes of a given document, and so on. A first support to extract such information from the SDB is provided by the graphical interface, through the entity graphs, the is-a graph, the dynamic graph, and the static-reference and the event precedence graphs shown in Fig. 25. However, such graphs provide summary information about the contents of the OIS conceptual schema. The designer, while defining and checking the schema, needs to examine the specifications in detail, focusing on particular aspects.

To allow for retrieval of specific information from the SDB, we use the Query Module of the C-TODOS tool shown in Fig. 15 of Sect. 3.

When defining the Query Module, we examined several design alternatives for its implementation. First, we considered the opportunity of using SQL as a query language, as the Specification Database is realized using a relational DBMS. This possibility was discarded as the queries would be too implementation dependent, and the benefit of having a semantic data model for describing office elements in the conceptual schema would be partially lost. Therefore, we decided to develop a specific querying module for the TODOS conceptual design environment. The problem to be solved was that of being able to extract information useful for the designer in a flexible and easy way. Two solutions have been proposed during the project:

- a semantic query language  
- a menu-based interface allowing to ask queries relevant for OIS conceptual design.

As a basis for both solutions, we studied the classes of queries that are important for supporting OIS design and for delivering the results of the conceptual design phase to other design phases in TODOS.

TODQuel (TODOS Query Language) (Pernici 1988) is a query language for semantic models. In TODQuel, the queries are constructed using a semantic description of the TCM model. Each modeling concept in TCM is described using the same concepts of aggregation, association, and classification on which TCM is based. Queries are formulated using this description as a basis. For instance, in Fig. 22, we show a partial description of the semantic schema for entity "entity" in TCM. "entity" has a name and an association of properties, each with a name and a type. If we want to know which entities in the OIS schema have multimedia (image) properties, we use the semantic schema for "entity" in the following way:

- relevant entities are selected, traversing the schema of entity to find at least one property type equal to image;  
- the names of the selected entities are retrieved.

TODQuel is based on first-order predicate calculus. We refer the interested reader to (Pernici 1988) for details on TODQuel.

The disadvantage of TODQuel is that query formulation is rather technical and results in a difficult querying interface for conceptual designers, which should be considered as non technical users of the conceptual design tool.

Therefore, we decided to apply the theoretical basis gained with the study of TODQue in the realization of a menu based interface that enables the designer to formulate queries easily and according to possible types of analysis to be done on the conceptual OIS schema.
