# Getting Started in 3D with Maya

Create a Project from Start to Finish Model, Texture, Rig, Animate, and Render in Maya

Adam Watkins

Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier

225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA

The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1GB, UK

## © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.

This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).

## Notices

Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.

To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

## Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Application submitted.

## British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN: 978-0-240-82042-2

For information on all Focal Press publications visit our website at www.elsevierdirect.com

Printed in the United States of America

12 13 14 15 5 4 3 2 1

Typeset by: diacriTech, Chennai, India

Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries

www.elsevier.com | www.bookaid.org | www.sabre.org

ELSEVIER

BOOK AID
International

Sabre Foundation

## Contents

## Acknowledgments......xiii

## Introduction......XV

## Chapter 1: Animation Workflow....1

High-Rez 3D....1

Low-Rez 3D....2

Workflow 3

An Idea, a Sketch, Lots of Research, and New Inspiration 3

Research 4

Modeling 5

UV Layout 6

Texture 7

Rigging and Skinning 7

Animation 8

Lighting and Rendering....9

Flexibility in the Process....10

Conclusion....11

## Chapter 2: Maya Philosophy ......13

A Bit of History....13

So What Is It? 14

What You Need to Run It 15

Processor....15

Memory....15

Video Processor....16

Monitor 17

Three Button Mouse....17

Conclusion 17

How Maya "Thinks"....17

Interface....18

View Panel....19

Tool Box 26

Tutorial 2.1 Tool Box Exploration 26

The Move Tool 27

The Rotate Tool 28

The Scale Tool 29

Power of Maya's Selection System....30

Lasso Tool 30

Adjusting Selections 31

Objects versus Components....32

Paint Selection Tool....34

Soft Modification Tool....35

Universal Manipulator 38

Show Manipulator Tool and Last Tool Used 39

Keyboard Shortcuts....39

Channel Box 39

Outliner 40

Modes 41

Interface Wrap Up....42

Projects....43

Tutorial 2.2 Setting Projects for "Escaping the Madness"....43

Conclusion 46

## Chapter 3: Architectural Modeling ....47

The Polygon 47

Parts....48

Traits of Polygon 49

Polycounts 50

Modeling Modes 50

Escaping the Madness 51

Gathering Research....53

## Tutorial 3.1 Architectural Polygonal Game Modeling:

Escaping the Madness 54

Setting the Project....54

Saving a New Scene 54

Laying the Foundation....55

Roughing Out the Scene 57

Scaling and Positioning the Walls with Snapping 61

Duplicating....62

Boolean 64

Component Level Editing 66

Extruding Polygons 67

Conclusion 82

Tutorial 3.2 Prop Polygonal Game Modeling: Escaping the Madness.....82

Creating an End Table....83

Constructing the Frame....88

Insert Edge Loop Tool....88

Cut Faces Tool 91

Bridge 91

Bevel 97

Conclusion 101

Tutorial 3.3 NURBS Modeling in Architecture....101

Curves (Splines)....102

Surfaces 104

Smooth 108

NURBS for Trim 110

Import....116

Conclusion 117

Homework....118

## Chapter 4: Organic Modeling ......119

Tutorial 4.1 Game Character Modeling....120

Some Notes 120

Getting Started....121

Image Planes and Setting Up to Work 121

Display Layers 126

Create Polygon Tool....127

Merge to Center 129

Creating Dynamic Mirrored Geometry....137

Sculpt Geometry Tool....148

Soft Modification Tool....149

Append to Polygon Tool 152

Interactive Split Tool 153

Mirror Geometry....174

Conclusion....176

Homework....177

## Chapter 5: UVs and UV Layout ....179

UVs 180

UV Texture Editor 180

Maneuvering with UV Space 180

UV Texture Editor Interface....181

Selecting Components....181

Shells....182

UV Maps, Snapshots, and the Purpose for It All....182

Projections 183

Getting to It....183

Tutorial 5.1 UV Layout for Architecture and Level Design....184

Dummy Material....185

Automatic Mapping 188

Planar Mapping....190

Sewing and Moving and Sewing UV Edges 192

UV Snapshots....196

Cut UV Edges....197

Saving Out UV Snapshot 198

Wrapping Up 200

Conclusion 201

Tutorial 5.2 Organic Form UV Layouts....201

The Head 201

Cylindrical Mapping 203

Smooth UVs 204

Refining the Face Region 207

Half the Work, Twice the Results....212

Armor Pieces 212

The Belt and More Cylindrical Mapping....214

Cylindrical Mapping Revisited....215

The Boot 216

Chests, Backs, and Planar Mapping 216

Hands 217

Misc. Cleanup....218

Mirroring 219

Scale and Organize 221

Conclusion....223

What's Next....223

Homework....223

Chapter 6: Material Creation and Texture Painting ....225

Nomenclature 225

The Hypershade 226

Creating and Applying Materials 228

Tutorial 6.1 Game Level and Architectural Texturing....228

Walls 229

Texture Resources 229

Photoshop Preparation 230

Trying It On for Size 235

Layering Textures 238

Ambient Occlusion for Texturing 244

Beyond Color 251

Bump Mapping....256

Conclusion 259

Tutorial 6.2 Textures for Organic Forms 259

Preparation....259

Faux AO 263

Textures as Painting Basis 266

Implementing into Maya 269

Conclusion 270

Wrapping Up and Moving On 270

Homework 270

## Chapter 7: Lighting and Rendering....271

Maya's Lighting Instruments....272

Tutorial 7.1 Lighting Instrument Exploration....273

Point Light 274

Spot Light 279

Directional Light 282

Area Lights 285

Volume Lights 286

Ambient Light 287

Tutorial 7.2....287

Mental Ray 292

Cycs 295

Shader Types 300

Preparing for Final Render 304

Conclusion 306

Tutorial 7.3 Character Lighting 306

Scene Setup 307

Key Light 307

Warm Side Fill Lights 309

Cool Side Fill Lights 311

Group Adjustments....315

Conclusion......316

Homework....317

## Chapter 8: Character Rigging and Skinning....319

Deformation Objects and Joints 320

Joint Behavior 320

Joints as a Deformation Object....321

Tutorial 8.1 Joint Chain for the Alien 323

Root Joint 323

Legs 324

IK vs. FK....329

Mirror 331

Upper Body 332

Arms 333

Hand 335

Orienting Joints....337

Foot Roll Rig 338

Further Organization....345

Tutorial 8.2 Skin Weighting 346

Component Editor....348

Painting Skin Weights....350

Testing 357

Mirror Skin Weights 357

Conclusion....358

## Chapter 9: Animation in Maya ......359

How Does Animation Work? 360

Tutorials to Learn Maya's Animation Tools....361

Tutorial 9.1: Animating a Bouncing Ball 361

The Graph Editor....369

Anatomy of a Curve....371

Bezier Curves, Anchors, and Handles 372

Conclusion 376

Tutorial 9.2: Wagging a Tail 376

Tutorial 9.3: A Walk Cycle 383

Rendering Animations 397

Conclusion......399

Homework....399

Appendix A: Preparing Character Style Sheets 401

Appendix B: Creating Seamless Textures 411

Index 419

## Acknowledgments

Books are always a team effort. Of especial help with this one was the tireless work of my tech editor, former student, colleague, and friend Jake Green. His contribution toward maintaining the consistency and the tone of the book was invaluable. His work is inspiring and his progress over the years has been tremendous.

Kelly Michel and the VISIBLE team at the Los Alamos National Laboratory - where this book was incubated - also provided tremendous help. It was good fun working with that team and there are great things ahead.

Finally, in this, my tenth book, I give a special shout-out to my high school English teacher - Ms. Eva Torres back at Edinburg North High School. Her excitement for literature and writing has been highly inspiring, and I often find myself looking back on her instructions and ideas as I tidy up what I have planned to write. I graduated a long time ago - it's amazing how important that high school teacher can be. Many thanks Ms. Torres - can I get some extra credit for this....?

# Introduction

3D. It's everywhere. From stereoscopic movies to online logos to billboards along the side of the road, chances are, even today you've seen 3D content. In recent years, 3D has gone from a specialty (and sometimes gimmicky) afterthought to a staple of the creative industry. The products you use were visualized in 3D before being manufactured, the streets you drive down are likely flanked by buildings that were previsualized in 3D before being built, and often the street itself (if it's recent) was created in some 3D software before construction was begun. And of course, all of this is in addition to the ubiquitous presence of 3D in most every form of entertainment and in every form of digital entertainment.

Like many new forms of digital art, at the beginning, the technology was instantly available to everyone, but the on-ramp was steep and often difficult to ascend. The area was flooded with hobbyists who could get their hands on the software, but continually produced uninspired work. This happened in the professional world as well - for all the never-ending genius of Pixar and the nice work of early Dreamworks, there emerged as competition, some really poorly conceived and even more poorly executed feature films that really besmirched the hallowed artwork of 3D animation.

Now, after many years, viewers have become more discerning in what they consider "good" 3D and 3D animation. Reviewers for games are no longer dazzled by the fact that games are 3D, but they start making real commentary on the artistry and efficacy of modeling, style, and animation choices. Movie reviews have become incredibly discerning, and substandard technique in modeling and animation is quickly caught and called out. Animation consumers have come of age.

## Benefits and Drawbacks of Tool Sophistication

This is good and bad for animators or aspiring animators. It's great because as the consumer's eye for animation has grown in sophistication, the tools that allow for the production have grown increasingly robust. This means that there are many very powerful toolsets that have allowed for further power, faster, and at a lower skill set. From the early days of having to use the command line to create a cube, the current click and drag to get full cloth dynamics and fluid integration into a project is a huge leap forward. However, the bad news is that viewers of 3D are simply less impressed with another bit of dazzling technology - they demand a compelling story and a deft touch in handling the visuals of any project (game, TV, film, web, etc.). The days of blindly dazzling effects are over - consumers are just too savvy.

What this means is that the most successful 3D projects will come from people who have done a lot of work beyond the technical - people who have studied light, composition, form, and movement (just to get started). Often times, this comes from formal training (college, university, art school, etc.), but not always. There are clearly folks who are able to intuitively produce products that show these skills, and others who gain these skills in the old fashioned way - through reading and immense amounts of sweat equity to grow the skills themselves.

Having said this, no matter what the art and composition skills of the artist are, without knowledge of how to use the tool - the skills will never have a chance to be put on display. So in addition to traditional skills, the competitive 3D artist of today also must understand the tools - and how to use the tools to convey their knowledge of story or art. This book is designed to assist in getting into dynamic, complex, and very powerful tools faster, so that great artwork can find a visual voice and great work can be produced.

## Who's It For?

With the goal of this book being a facilitator to help the reader gain a new instrument in your tool chest, it's worth while pointing out that there are multiple situations in which this book can be effective:

## Hobbyist

So you've loved the 3D work that has evolved in recent years. It seems like magic, and more importantly, it looks like fun. The 3D hobbyist market has become increasingly sophisticated in recent years. There was a time that a bit of Bryce and some simple Poser satisfied the weekend 3D warrior. But those days are past for the most part. Today's hobbyists - like today's consumers - know that there is much to partake of in the 3D world and want to get into the craft deeper more quickly. If this is you, this book has many sections that will get you up to speed (well beyond a dabbler) in a hurry.

Because each chapter starts with some background information, it will help those of you without a technical background in 3D graphics to get a chance to understand what the core ideas are before diving into the tutorials. However, since the book is full of tutorials, you will very quickly be "doing it" - creating 3D, and producing work that will be fun to show off and fulfilling to create.

## Student

I've been teaching 3D for a long time (almost 15 years now), and I have seen a lot of students come through my programs, classes, and curricula. I know how students learn 3D and how some of the concepts come quicker than

others. I also know that different students learn in different ways. Some learn aurally - they listen to a lecture and they grasp the idea and are off the races. Some learn visually - they watch the demo and seeing is learning. Still others find that careful listening and visual learning is a good start, but that some text helps cement the concepts - and a tutorial helps move the "I saw it done" into the "I just did it, and now I understand it."

This book is heavily tutorial based. It's chock full of step by step pages of "do this and then do that." For students who are using this as a textbook, or as a supplement to in-class instruction, be sure to take a moment and ask yourself "why?" Why is the author having me do this now? What's the goal behind this collection of steps? And most importantly: How can I use this technique in my own work? Do this and the book will be much more than just a collection of steps - and become a platform to creating your own projects.

## Teacher

Hopefully you're out of a college or university program in which you did extensive 3D training and you're looking for a book to allow you to learn/teach a new technology to supplement your current skills. If this is your situation, this book should move quite quickly for you, and you might be able to skip past most of the theoretical discussions at the beginnings of each chapter as you learn to translate your current vocabulary into Maya-speak. But, if you're not (and this is the case at most middle schools, junior high schools, high schools, and even some colleges and universities), this book will be of great help. The "Whys" of 3D are covered in every chapter. It's critical - especially when attempting to teach this stuff - that the core ideas and principles are understood. 3D is deep and goes way beyond hitting the right tools at the right time. The questions that come up in class - and the dark alleyways of the software that students wander down - demand an understanding of what's really happening behind the GUI.

For you, the descriptions of the technology at the beginning of every chapter and tutorial will be critical. Be sure to read those parts carefully and take a careful look at how those ideas are being illustrated through the course of the tutorials. The tutorials all have a pedagogical goal that goes beyond just following the tutorial recipe. Grasp that goal and it will speed your mastery of the tool and allow you a firm footing upon which to lift your students.

## Book Organization

The book has nine chapters. These chapters are split up into the basic steps of 3D creation: Modeling, UV Layout, Texturing, Lighting and Rendering, Rigging and Skinning, and finally Animation. Each of these chapters will begin with
