a disinterested party, namely, the notary public. A protest may also serve as a vehicle for giving notice of dishonor to all interested parties.

Noting a Dishonored Draft. In the United States, under the UCC (3-509), as well as in the United Kingdom, a draft may be "noted" before protesting. Noting is considered a preliminary form of protest and provides a less expensive legal proof of presentation. Once noted, a draft can be protested at a subsequent time should this be required.

## COLLECTION-RELATED BANK SERVICES

In addition to collecting items payable abroad, banks offer a number of related services that can be of substantial assistance to exporters and importers.

## Completion of Documents

An exporter located in the inland -- say, the Middle West -- may wish to ship on a collection basis. To obtain an ocean bill of lading, however, he must first ship the goods by rail or truck to the nearest port. Only after the goods have been loaded on the vessel can an on-board bill of lading be issued and mailed back to the importer. To eliminate the time delay in mailing the bill of lading back to the Middle West and then sending all the documents to a New York bank for collection, the exporter instructs his New York freight forwarder to send the bill of lading and other documents obtained by him -- such as the ocean marine insurance policy -- directly to the collecting bank. In the meantime, the exporter mails to the bank his instruction letter, blank signed draft, invoice, as well as a copy of his instructions to the freight forwarder. Once the forwarder has his part of the documents completed, he submits them to the bank. The latter can now determine the amount of such additional charges as insurance and freight that should be added to the invoice. The bank, thereupon completes the invoice and fills in the total amount due as well as the date on the previously received blank signed draft. All the documents are now completed and can be sent out for collection in the usual manner. Since bills of lading are usually consigned to the shipper, the bank endorses them on his behalf, as agent.

The service of completing documents can be most valuable for the exporter, not only in doing work which would otherwise have to be done by his export department, but also by saving time. He, therefore,

can expect to get the proceeds of the collection earlier than he would otherwise. The bank's work on a collection involving completion of documents is greater and its commission for this type of service is, therefore, higher than for ordinary collections.

## Direct Collections

Occasionally, an exporter shipping out of a port other than New York (say, New Orleans) may wish to send his collections directly to the foreign collecting bank but still make use of the follow-up services of a New York bank. To facilitate this transaction, the New York bank supplies the exporter with direct collection forms which enable him to send his draft and documents directly, but for the account of the New York bank. Several copies of the direct collection form are sent to the domestic collecting bank for information and follow-up.

By using this service the exporter foregoes the chance of having the bank examine his documents before they are mailed out. He benefits, however, from the bank's follow-up services. Moreover, since the collection is sent out for account of a bank, the foreign collecting bank will usually charge the same collection fee that it would apply when a bank sends in the item directly. Many banks abroad charge lower collection fees to other banks than they do to commercial firms.

## Consignments

Occasionally, a foreign shipper may wish to export merchandise to a particular market without having a definite buyer. To be of assistance, banks may be willing to have the merchandise consigned to themselves. The consignee bank arranges for customs entry, storage of the goods in a bonded or free warehouse, and insurance. The shipper probably has potential buyers in mind who may wish to examine the merchandise at the warehouse. Once a sale has been made, the bank arranges for delivery against payment in accordance with instructions received from the exporter or his bank. Usually consignments are stored against a non-negotiable warehouse receipt. Hence, partial sales can be released against a delivery order signed by the bank.

Occasionally, goods coming into the United States on consignment have to be examined and cleared through such government agencies as the Pure Food and Drug Administration or the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Release of merchandise for inspection against trust receipt and subsequent placement in a warehouse can also be arranged through commercial banks.

## Indemnities

Since documents are sent by airmail while goods move on ships, title papers usually arrive before the goods. Thus, under normal circumstances, the importer will have sufficient time to obtain the bill of lading from the bank so as to be able to pick up the goods from the pier when they arrive.

Perhaps due to delays in the mail, goods sometimes arrive before the documents. To induce the shipping company to release the goods without a negotiable bill of lading, banks may issue indemnities on behalf of importers. Through the indemnity, the bank agrees to see to it that the bill of lading is duly turned over after it arrives. Moreover, should anyone -- including an innocent holder in due course -- turn up with the bill of lading and demand the goods, the bank agrees to hold the shipping company harmless.

Banks also issue indemnities to procure payment of drafts sent for collection or under letters of credit when related documents are missing or contain discrepancies. Of course, in all these cases the bank retains recourse to its customer should it receive a claim under an indemnity agreement. An indemnity is, therefore, issued by a bank at the request of and based on the credit strength of a customer, i.e., the importer in case of a steamship indemnity and the exporter in the case of documentary discrepancies.

## Domiciliations

American companies selling abroad often offer extended terms evidenced by a series of promissory notes or usance drafts on the buyer. Whenever one or more of these notes or drafts mature, collection must be made from the primary obligor. Before maturity, these instruments may be domiciled with a bank for safekeeping. If the foreign buyer has an account with the bank of domiciliation, it may be possible to set up an arrangement whereby his account is automatically charged at maturity. Alternatively, the account of a foreign correspondent bank may be charged on behalf of the obligor. Payment may also be received from another bank or the note or draft may have to be presented to the obligor at maturity. In the last case, the item may be sent out as a clean collection. Domiciliation with a bank has the advantage of providing safekeeping for the negotiable instruments. At the same time, the exporter is also relieved of having to initiate the collection of each of the instruments at the appropriate time.

## ADVANTAGES AND RISKS OF FOREIGN COLLECTION TERMS

At first glance, the use of foreign collection terms seems to be a most satisfactory procedure from the points of view of both the exporter and importer; unfortunately this is not always the case.

## Advantages

The exporter is assured that the importer will not be able to get hold of the merchandise until he has either accepted a time draft or paid a sight or arrival draft. The importer, on the other hand, gets partial financing in the case of a sight draft (i.e., the time it takes for the exporter and his bank to assemble and mail out the documentary draft plus mailing time), and complete financing in the case of an arrival or time draft.

## Risks for Exporter

Closer examination of collection practices shows, however, that there are a number of risks, especially for the seller, but also for the buyer.

Non-Acceptance of Merchandise. One common danger is that the importer may refuse to accept the merchandise. This refusal may be based on some small, inadvertent infraction of the sales contract by the exporter while the real reason is that, between the time the order was placed and the draft received, there has been a significant drop in the market price. When this happens, the exporter is stuck with his merchandise in a foreign port, probably incurring heavy storage charges, and a market only at a greatly reduced price. Taking court action against the importer is in most cases not a satisfactory solution due to the expense and time delay involved.

Usually the foreign collecting bank will offer its assistance in arranging for storage and insurance in the port of destination. Often the bank can help in finding an alternate buyer for the merchandise, although a substantial discount is still required in most cases.

Non-Payment of Trade Acceptance. Generally, shipping on a time draft basis is more risky for the seller than a sight draft. In the latter case at least he maintains control over the merchandise until he is paid. Otherwise the exporter takes not only the risk that the time draft will not be accepted but that the trade acceptance will not be paid at

maturity. If the acceptance is not paid, the importer has control over the merchandise, thus preventing the exporter from selling it elsewhere.

Possession of Goods Without Payment. Another danger an exporter might face is that the importer, due to local regulations, can get possession of the merchandise without paying or accepting the draft. Certain governments, for instance, may demand that the buyer show them the shipping documents before they allocate the needed foreign exchange. In this and similar cases the documents may have to be released to the importer on trust receipt. Thus, the exporter and his agent bank lose control over the merchandise before payment.

Exchange Restrictions. It may occur that the importer is perfectly willing to pay, but that local exchange regulations do not permit him to obtain the necessary foreign exchange. The merchandise in question may not be approved for importation and in this case exchange will never be made available. Alternatively, those requiring foreign exchange may have to go on a waiting list that may extend several months or even years. If that should happen, the importer usually deposits the local currency counterpart of the amount due with a local commercial or central bank for account of the exporter. The exporter cannot, however, make use of the funds until foreign exchange is made available by the authorities.

## Minimizing the Risks

This last potential problem highlights the need by the exporter to keep current on the foreign exchange regulations and conditions prevailing in the countries to which he ships.

Keeping Informed. Many large commercial banks issue periodic reports on import and foreign exchange regulations, as well as the bank's own collection experience in the various countries. Bank officials who travel overseas frequently are also a good source of information on current conditions. Additionally, the Foreign Credit Interchange Bureau publishes periodic reports on collection experience of commercial firms with various countries.

An exporter can, to some extent, guard himself against refusal to accept merchandise by knowing the reputation and financial strength of the importer and being familiar with the market for his merchandise. If an exporter, for instance, gets a sudden surge of orders from a market which he knows is limited, he may become suspicious and

hypothesize that importers are ordering on the basis of a temporary shortage that has driven up prices but which may well be back to normal again by the time the draft is presented to the importer. Whenever the exporter has any reason to be suspicious, it is probably a good idea to ask for an irrevocable letter of credit.

Adequate Insurance. When shipping on a foreign collection basis, it is wise for the exporter to insist on using his own underwriter for ocean marine coverage, and to extend the coverage while goods are at the port or warehouse of destination. This way, should the importer refuse to accept the shipment, the exporter is at least assured of having adequate insurance.

Cash Deposit. The risk to the seller may also be minimized if he requires a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit for a percentage of the total amount, with the remainder payable on a collection basis upon surrender of title documents. If the importer refuses to accept the goods, the initial payment should be large enough to cover any cost of reshipment or sale of the goods at a discount in the local market.

## Risks for Importer

A transaction based on collection terms is not entirely without risk for the importer. He must rely primarily on the exporter's good reputation, honesty, and ability to deliver merchandise of the grade, quality, and quantity ordered. On sight or arrival draft terms the importer generally cannot inspect the merchandise before making payment. On time draft terms he can inspect, but only after having obligated himself--at least against holders in due course--by accepting the draft. The importer may be able to protect himself against faulty merchandise by requiring an inspection certificate as part of the documentation.

## Justified Refusal To Accept Goods

Often the importer will be entirely justified in refusing a shipment due to a mistake of the exporter. Very common, for instance, are shipments by the exporter that are later than the date agreed on in the contract. A late shipment, especially of seasonal merchandise, may cause the importer to lose his market. Other common infractions by exporters that may result in non-acceptance of the shipment include:

Increase in the product price from the previous agreement without first obtaining the importer's consent

Quality of the merchandise not as previously agreed upon (this may be determined by the importer if he is given the right to inspect the merchandise before accepting it)

Insistence by the exporter that the importer pay certain charges on which there was no previous agreement

Neglect in carrying out packing and marking instructions supplied by the importer

Whenever a buyer refuses a shipment, the first thing the exporter should do is make an investigation of the real cause. If the seller is at fault or if there is valid justification in the importer's complaint, the exporter should, for the sake of good will and further business, make prompt and reasonable adjustment. If the buyer is at fault due to financial embarrassment, there may be reason for an extension in the credit time. With some luck this may result not only in ultimate payment, but might also further cement a lasting customer relationship.

## Conclusion

It may be concluded that collection terms are very useful in certain circumstances, but they should never be entered into unless the following conditions are present:

Complete confidence between buyer and seller in each other's honesty, reputation, financial strength, and, in the case of the buyer, his ability to deliver the merchandise.

Knowledge by the exporter of local exchange regulations--i.e., shipment on a collection basis is not recommended if there is a local exchange shortage that makes it questionable whether exchange will be allocated or whether the exporter may not have to go on a waiting list.

Complete understanding and agreement between buyer and seller as to what each other's rights and responsibilities are under the sales contract.

If there is doubt concerning any of the above points, it would probably be to the benefit of both the seller and the buyer to request letter of credit terms.

## FINANCING FOREIGN RECEIVABLES

So far we have considered foreign collections without the benefit of outside financing. This means that the exporter in the case of a time or

arrival draft and the exporter and importer jointly in the case of a sight draft are themselves providing the financing for the shipment. Of course, to the extent that the exporter and importer have unused lines of credit with their banks, they are in a position to borrow the needed money without necessarily tying the financing to the trade transaction.

A more interesting and challenging situation arises when the exporter's and/or importer's regular lines are used up for other, perhaps domestic, transactions. This means that, to finance their foreign trade, they must ask their bankers to rely on the underlying merchandise being shipped as security.

There are several phases during the movement of goods from exporter to importer when outside financing may be required:

The exporter may require financing to buy and store the commodities prior to shipment. He can potentially be accommodated with warehouse receipt financing, discussed in Chapter 10.

The importer may need financing between the time that he has to pay the exporter and the time he gets the proceeds from, in turn, selling the merchandise in question. He can be accommodated by trust receipt or warehouse re-receipt financing or a combination of the two (this too was described in Chapter 10).

The exporter may need financing to carry his foreign receivables. This is commonly done by advances against outward collections, discounting of trade acceptances, factoring, or acceptance financing. It is primarily to these methods of financing foreign collections that this section is devoted.

## Advances Against Foreign Collections

A manufacturer or merchant doing a purely domestic business can often get a loan from a bank, finance company, or factor by using his accounts receivable as security. Since outward dollar collections are no more than foreign receivables, the same general type of financing vehicle is open to exporters.

Pool Basis. The most common method for financing foreign receivables is for the exporter to submit all his outward collections to his bank as security. The bank regards these collections as a pool of collateral and the exporter may then borrow up to a stated maximum percentage of the total amount of receivables in the pool at any one time. When a particular collection is paid, it is remitted by the foreign

collecting bank to the domestic bank that has given the advance. The latter uses the proceeds of the collection to credit, i.e., to reduce the customer's loan account.

Individual Transaction Basis. Some exporters have no need for a continuous financing arrangement like the collateral pool method outlined above. Nevertheless, they would like to occasionally obtain financing on only one foreign collection, perhaps a very large one which they might have difficulty financing themselves. In these cases, the bank may be willing to give an advance with only this one receivable as security. Again, the bank will determine a maximum percentage of the amount of the draft that it is willing to advance. When payment for the financed foreign receivable is received, the bank will first use the proceeds to liquidate the loan, and credit any excess to the exporter.

Determining Percentage of Advance. How does a bank determine what percentage of a collateral pool or of an individual collection it is willing to advance? Since the bank usually retains recourse to the exporter, the latter's credit strength and reputation is of prime importance. Other factors, however, also often play a significant part. If the foreign importers are prime companies with undoubted reputation and financial strength, the bank is likely to advance a larger percentage on collections directed to them. The countries to which the collections are directed are also carefully weighed. Importers in some countries invariably pay drafts drawn on them promptly. Thus, if a collateral pool contains many drafts drawn on importers in such countries, the percentage advanced will be higher. In other countries payment is generally slow, perhaps because importers are financially weaker or because currency restrictions make U. S. dollar exchange hard to obtain. If collections are to these latter type countries, the bank will be willing to advance only a lower percentage. Indeed, certain collections to habitually slow paying importers and/or countries may be entirely ineligible from financing and the bank may insist that they be withdrawn from the collateral pool.

A final factor that banks frequently consider is the nature of the merchandise being financed. If it represents marketable commodities that can be sold readily and with no or only a small discount in the event that the importer refuses to pay or accept the draft, a higher percentage can be advanced. If the goods are perishable, seasonal, or subject to unpredictable changes in fashions, they may be impossible to sell to anyone else if the drawee refuses to accept the shipment. In

this case the bank will be willing to advance only a small percentage. Generally, the percentage of a pool or an individual collection that a bank is willing to lend varies between 50% and 100%, depending on its evaluation of the above factors.

Title Documents. Usually, when a bank makes advances against foreign collections, it will pay particular attention to the documents submitted. Since the financing institution wishes to maintain control of the merchandise, the bill of lading should be either to the order of the shipper and blank endorsed, or to the order of the bank. In no case should the bill of lading be consigned to the buyer since this gives him control over the goods. Banks generally also insist that shipments they finance are covered by adequate insurance.

## Acceptance Financing

An alternate method of financing foreign collections which may be preferred by banks during periods of tight money is to use bankers' acceptances. As with all types of acceptance financing, the exporter first executes and submits to his bank an acceptance agreement.

To obtain acceptance financing for his foreign receivables, the exporter has to draw two drafts. One of them is a time draft drawn on the foreign buyer which, together with the necessary documents, is sent out for collection in the usual manner. The other draft (which may be for the same or a smaller amount as agreed upon by the bank and the exporter) is drawn by the exporter on his bank and has the same tenure as the draft addressed to the importer. The bank accepts this latter draft and at the same time discounts it, crediting the net amount to the exporter's account. The bank thus creates a banker's acceptance that, if the bank is large and well known, enjoys a wide market in which it can be sold should the bank find itself short of loanable funds.

When payment is received from the importer, the bank uses the proceeds to pay its own acceptance which, if it was sold in the market, will be presented for payment on the same day. Of course, if payment from the drawee is not received, the bank will make use of its right of recourse on the drawer and demand payment from him.

## Discounting Trade Acceptances

Once a draft has been accepted by the foreign buyer it becomes a trade acceptance carrying the full credit obligation of the importer.

The acceptance, in fact, becomes the property of the exporter who will ask the collecting bank to present it to the acceptor for payment at maturity. The exporter is, in this instance, providing the financing.

It may well be possible that the exporter needs the money before maturity of the trade acceptance. In this case, he may be able to ask his bank or commercial finance company to discount the draft with or without recourse to him. If the primary obligor (acceptor) is a well known company of top credit standing, the bank or finance company may be willing to discount the draft without recourse to the exporter. More typically, however, the lender will look to the exporter for recourse if the primary obligor does not pay the amount when due.

When discounting a trade acceptance, the bank advances to the exporter the face amount of the draft minus discount charges until the date of maturity. The lender actually is buying the trade acceptance for value. It, therefore, becomes a holder in due course of a negotiable instrument with all the benefits this status offers when demanding payment from the primary obligor. The same, incidentally, is also true whenever a bank or other financial institution makes an advance against a collection or pool of collections. As far as any intermediary collecting bank is concerned, if it has a financial interest in a collection, it enjoys all the rights of a holder in due course. $^{7}$

## Factoring

A factor is in the business of buying accounts receivables without recourse. In the past, factoring has been primarily oriented toward domestic trade in certain industries such as textiles. During the last few years, however, factoring has gone international. Several factoring firms have set up or invested in foreign affiliates. A number of large commercial banks have also gone into factoring, primarily by buying established firms. To the extent that these commercial banks finance foreign trade, their factoring affiliates have also become more active.

A factor's ability to buy receivables without recourse depends on his ability to make credit judgments on buyers. The factor, therefore, replaces the credit and, in part, the bookkeeping departments of sellers. Credit information is much more easy to obtain on domestic buyers than on those located overseas. However, with the establishment of foreign affiliates, factors have greatly increased their ability to pass on the credit of foreign importers. The factoring of foreign

receivables has, therefore, become more popular over recent years and this trend is likely to continue into the foreseeable future.

Procedurally, a factor who buys a foreign receivable must give his approval of the specific foreign obligor before the sales contract is concluded. Should the factor not approve the credit risk of a specific foreign buyer, however, the exporter may still go ahead and make the shipment at his own risk. If shipment to approved importers is made on a documentary collection basis, the draft and documents are submitted to the factor who, in fact, purchases them without recourse. He thus pays the money to the exporter either at the average maturity date, when actually received, or, if financing is also required, immediately. Thereafter, the draft and documents are routed through commercial banks for collection in the usual manner. Since the factor now owns the draft and documents, the collection process is undertaken for his account.

Exporters may also sell abroad on an open account basis, thus consigning shipping documents directly to the importer. This is more risky since the exporter and financing institution lose control over the merchandise. Open account shipments should, therefore, not be undertaken except to the most reputable and trusted foreign buyers. A factor buying foreign accounts receivables that were created through open account shipments follows in essence the same procedure as he would if he were buying domestic receivables.

## 13

# Letters of

# Credit -- Procedure

## INTRODUCTION

## Need for Letters of Credit

Frequently in international trade an exporter will, for some reason, not be entirely satisfied with the credit or reputation of a foreign buyer. Foreign credit reports are often sketchy and do not give sufficient information for the seller to make a decision on his chance of ultimate payment. This applies particularly to the vast majority of foreign companies that are small or medium-sized, and therefore not well known in international circles. Additionally, the country in which the foreign importer is located may be in a weak financial position with limited hard exchange to meet its foreign debt obligation. Thus, even if the importer himself is financially strong and reputable, conditions beyond his control may prevent him from discharging his foreign obligations.

Even an importer with a good credit standing may be tempted not to accept a shipment that he receives on a collection basis if, in the interim, there has been a significant drop in the price of the merchandise involved. He may try to find some kind of minor technicality of non-compliance by the exporter on which basis the shipment can legitimately be refused. Recourse to the courts in cases of a refused shipment is usually time-consuming and expensive. Moreover, a legal battle may result in the loss of a customer.

To solve these and similar problems, letters of credit may be used effectively by exporters and importers, as well as other companies that wish either to guarantee performance of an obligation or make certain that some obligation to them will be properly discharged. Specifically, letters of credit may be useful to the following types of firms:

Sellers who wish to ship on a cash basis -- that is, under terms which provide payment to the seller at the time of shipment

Exporters who sell to companies abroad that are either not well known internationally or are not considered to be prime credit risks

Companies who sell to customers in countries with limited foreign exchange reserves and who therefore have found it necessary to impose import and exchange controls

Sellers of specially manufactured machinery and other merchandise

Engineering and other service type firms that use letters of credit to assure payment for services as they are performed

Companies who sell on a non-repetitive basis to domestic customers whom they don't know well

Companies who have overseas subsidiaries requiring borrowings from foreign financial institutions that have to be guaranteed by a reputable domestic bank

Contractors and others requiring bid and/or performance guarantees

Most letters of credit issued today cover commercial trade transactions; consequently these types of credits will receive first attention. In Chapter 14 we shall also briefly discuss letters of credit used for purposes other than facilitating current trade transactions.

## Definition

To make sure that an obligation to him will be met, a seller or other beneficiary may wish the superior credit standing of a large financial institution to stand between him and a buyer or other party who is expected to perform. This can often be done by means of a commercial letter of credit. The credit is, in essence, a letter addressed to the seller, written and signed by a bank acting on behalf of the buyer. In it the bank promises that it will pay or accept drafts drawn on itself if the seller conforms exactly to the specific conditions set forth in the letter of credit. In most commercial transactions these conditions will state that the seller is to submit, together with the draft, certain documents such as a negotiable bill of lading, insurance papers, invoices, etc. Only if the documentation submitted is exactly as specified will the bank pay or accept the exporter's draft.

Through the letter of credit a bank substitutes its own commitment to pay for that of its customer, i.e., the buyer. While a letter of credit is not really a guarantee, $^{1}$ it serves almost the same purpose in that the bank assures payment to the seller as long as he complies with stated conditions.

## Advantages to Seller

To have a letter of credit opened in his favor may be of substantial advantage to the seller of goods and services.

Eliminates Credit Risk. When payment is assured by a prime commercial bank, the exporter no longer needs to rely on the willingness and capability of the importer to make payment. If the bank that opens or confirms the credit is of undoubted standing, the seller can be sure that all amounts due him will be paid on time.

Reduces or Eliminates Exchange and Political Risks. When an exporter ships on a collection, open account, or consignment basis, there is always the danger that payment is delayed or withheld entirely due to political causes. The government of the importing country may cancel or withhold an import license. War or some similar disturbance may prevent payment. The importing country may get into financial difficulties and put a moratorium on all external payments; the importer may be permitted to deposit payment in local currency with a bank, but transfer into hard exchange may be delayed several months or even years.

If a letter of credit is opened by a local bank in the importer's country, the political and exchange risks are reduced, but not eliminated. Most probably the opening bank would not issue a hard currency credit unless it is absolutely assured that the particular import has the blessing of its government and that exchange will be made available by the central bank or other authority when payment is due. Even if a country imposes new exchange restrictions, open letters of credit of its commercial banks would probably be exempted. A country's international credit standing and credibility might be severely damaged if it failed to do this.

While a credit opened by a reputable local bank gives considerable protection, certain political risks are still present. The opening bank may be unable to meet its obligations due to war, insurrection, or a similar cause. The local government may be taken over by a coup
