as we will see below, friendship with the 'world' (kosmos). Such a friendship constitutes, in James's mind, turning one's back away from proper loyalty and deference to only God. To James, such actions merit shaming and shunning of the highest order to preserve the community of God's family.

## God in Economic Metaphors

James's other relational metaphors for God derive from the business world of his day, although in James's day there was not as hard a division between family and business as there often is today. These metaphors, God as friend, patron and judge, also require from the community of faith responses of praxis, praxes of loyalty to God and care for the community of faith.

Praxes of loyalty take two main forms in James: acting as God's friend and relying on God's patronage. Abraham is James's primary example of friendship with God. James 2.21-22 suggest that in offering Isaac on Moriah, Abraham is acting out his loyalty to God, even at the expense of his only son. This is the crux of James's faith-versus-works argument: Abraham's loyalty is demonstrated in the ways his actions reflect his beliefs--that is, his praxis. Abraham's loyalty makes him a friend of God (2.23). By contrast, in 4.2, James upbraids members of the community for their divided loyalty. They claim a loyalty to God but they crave worldly pleasures so much that they are willing to go to war with one another and even--claims James (one hopes exaggeratedly)--to kill one another! To James, these actions demonstrate divided loyalties between two rival patrons: God and the 'world' (kosmos). An attempt to be a friend of both James considers impossible.

To demonstrate its loyalty to God, the faith community must rely on God as its patron. God, for James, stands as the ultimate patron. God gives to the community all perfect gifts (1.17); and God gives to those who demonstrate single-hearted loyalty as much as they need (1.5-7). But this patron will not give to those who are 'double-minded' (1.6-7) or who divide their loyalty and hedge their bets with the world (4.1-4). And this patron has no interest in helping those who are proud (4.6). In describing God as patron, James presents his audience with a choice. They are to turn from the call of the world to choose a wealthy patron as the source of good gifts. Instead, they are to have one patron, the God who is the giver of all good gifts. As Darian Lockett puts it,

Where patron-client relationships with the 'rich' are rejected, such benefaction from God is promoted... God's giving is universal, abundant, without envy, and consistent. And it is the attitude of total trust and dependence upon God...to which James's readers are called (2008: 177).

Once more, as in the metaphor of marriage, James calls the community of faith to loyalty. Community members demonstrate this loyalty to God, their

friend and patron, by going to God with single-hearted trust as the source of the gifts and graces that they need, rather than competing for the favors of wealthy human patrons (James 2) or of the 'world' (kosmos) in general (4.1-4).

Since patrons in the first century also functioned as judges for the disputes of their friends and clients, unsurprisingly James's description of God as patron includes this description of God as judge. Community members would have recognized the metaphor 'God is judge' as easily as the metaphor 'God is father'. As Peter Davids notes, 'every Jew knew that God gave the law... God gave the law; God enforces the law. As the only sovereign, he [sic] has authority over life and death' (1989: 105). James uses the metaphor of God as judge of all persons to underscore the importance of ethical praxis within the community of faith. The community is to act as those who are about to be judged (2.12; 5.9), and stop judging other members of the community, as well as putting an end to fighting and grumbling against one another (4.11-12; 5.9). To be sure, the lawgiver and judge will judge the community on the law of liberty, but poor treatment of one another does not demonstrate the praxis of those who claim God as their friend, patron and judge.

God does not judge the community of faith alone. God is judge even of those who do not understand or acknowledge divine patronage, especially those who mistreat the poor. Accordingly, James consistently warns of God's severe judgment of those who become wealthy on the backs of the marginalized. James depicts this impending judgment most colorfully in 5.4: 'The wages of the workers who mowed your fields, those wages which have been withheld by you, they cry out, and the shouts of the harvesters have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.' James's warning reflects an ancient belief: God as judge of all hears the cry of those unjustly treated and comes to their aid. Without asserting the latter directly, James warns the community that the God they call patron and friend, father and birthmother, keeps an ear open for the cry of those who are mistreated.

Most contemporary readers would consider the majority of James's metaphors for God positive, even in light of questions of gender and class. However, James also uses a metaphor of slaveholder or slavemaster for God when James describes himself as a 'slave of God' (theou...doulos, 1.1). This metaphor of the religious person as God's slave runs throughout the Bible. According to Luke Timothy Johnson the term 'connotes the special relationship between God and humans defined in terms of possession (by God) and service (by humans)' (1995: 167). Johnson and other commentators express no concern that the nature of this relationship is one of possession and bondage, even though Johnson himself remarks, 'The term doulos denotes literal bondage to the authority of another' (1995: 167).

That James describes God as a slavemaster whom he serves in literal or even figurative bondage should make contemporary readers pause, lest we

develop an insensitivity to injustice within the Bible itself. Contemporary readers must question whether God as slaveholder is essential and inseparable from the other familial and business-oriented ancient metaphors or just a deeply problematic hangover from first-century Mediterranean culture. No easy response exists, for many fathers and mothers, husbands and, especially patrons, were also slavemasters, controlling their human property as they saw fit. James complicates the readers' decision by not attaching to the slavemaster metaphor any explicit praxis; 'slave of God' is just a title that he, like Paul, adopts without further comment. And what's more, it is practically the only self-description of James in his entire homiletic epistle. James the writer, the teacher of teachers and the leader of the community of faith who counsels so much good praxis to his community, identifies himself only with the phrase 'slave of God'.

## Jesus Christ and the Praxis of Faith

In stark contrast to James's many metaphors for God, the epistle is almost silent regarding Jesus Christ. The name Jesus occurs only twice in the epistle, once in the opening greeting (1.1) and once in James 2 (2.1). Far more frequent is the use of the word 'Lord'. However, many of these references may not be specific references to Jesus, but rather general references to God (see especially 5.4). In fact, only two of these uses of 'Lord' are clearly referring to Jesus: 5.7-8 and 5.14-15. As with his references to God, James's reference of Jesus Christ is not intended as an explanation or defense of the community's beliefs. Rather, James references Jesus Christ to call the community to the action of ethical praxis.

James's first explicit reference to Jesus Christ is part of his problematic self-identification as a 'slave' of Christ, an uncritical use of chattel slavery as a metaphor for his relationship to Jesus. James is not only a slave of God but also of the master or Lord Jesus Christ. As noted above, there is no explicit ethical praxis connected with this metaphor of slavery. However, an implicit problematic ethos and praxis accompany this metaphor: one of the unswerving obedience and complete submission reserved for chattel.

James's second explicit reference to Jesus Christ begins his argument about faith and favoritism in James 2. For James, one cannot model the faithfulness of Jesus Christ, or faith in Jesus Christ, while showing favoritism in the community. As the argument progresses, James chastises his community for importing the class distinctions and patronage system of the ancient world into the nascent church. These distinctions, James argues, do not befit those who claim to have the faithfulness of Christ or even faith in Christ. James makes it clear to his community that Jesus Christ would stand against such distinctions within the worshiping community.

In addition to James's explicit references to Jesus, the end of James's last chapter contains two other likely references, as mentioned earlier. The first of these, found in 5.14-15, refers to prayer 'in the name of the Lord'. The practice of performing ritual acts in the name of Jesus is well attested throughout the New Testament. Further, someone who understood himself to be under the aegis of the Law, as James clearly does (2.8), would not call his God by name, ritually or otherwise. Therefore, James here may be implicitly referring to Jesus Christ. The ethical praxis connected to this reference is the prayer and anointing of the sick, which is more broadly connected to the proper use of the tongue for James's community: members should use their tongues for song and prayer, rather than for fighting and quarreling.

Finally, Jas 5.7-8 seems also to be a reference to Jesus Christ. Here, James turns to an eschatological hope for the return of 'the Lord'. Although there are countless references to the coming of 'the Day of the Lord' in Hebrew Bible as an activity specifically linked to God, James's use of the Greek word parousia signals a more specific Christian theological expectation of the return--or second coming--of Christ. Like prayer in the name of Jesus, many New Testament writings attest to the centrality and importance of this belief for the early church. Once again, however, James references this central belief to call the community to praxis: in this case, the praxis of patience even in the face of the trials the community is facing and the temptations of the world around the community (5.7-8; cf. 1.2-4).

Although James rarely names or points to the person of Jesus, several scholars have pointed out that James extensively paraphrases the Sermon on the Mount as recorded in the Gospel according to Matthew (Witherington 2007: 394). This suggests that James was deeply familiar at least with the orally transmitted teachings of Jesus. However, James does not use these to instruct his community about what Jesus taught. James uses them to remind his community of the praxis that is expected of the community of Christ. Consider, for example, James's reference to the teaching 'do not store up for yourself treasures on earth' that is also found in Mt. 6.19. James's use of this teaching in 5.2-3 functions not as an introduction of the teaching of Jesus to novices, but as a condemnation of those who should already know the teaching but who do not follow it. Once more, James demonstrates a concern for the ethical praxis to those who are already followers of Christ rather than a desire to instruct new believers in the faith. James assumes that his community knows the teachings of Jesus; James wants them to practice what they know.

## The Praxis of Faith and Eschatological Expectation

In contrast to James's relative taciturnity about Jesus, the epistle lays a discernible if incomplete eschatological vision, a depiction of how things

will turn out in the end. James projects an imminent eschatology, a near advent of 'the Lord'. As noted above, James uses the word parousia here in its Christian theological sense. And this advent or return of the Christ is near ('at the door', 5.8). On this expectation of an imminent parousia, James bases both his warnings and visions of hope. Once more, James's intent is not primarily to teach new theological tenets to his community, but to remind his community that their praxes should match their confessions of faith.

## Eschatological Warnings

James's eschatological warnings of impending divine judgment fall first upon those he describes as the rich (5.1-6). He targets these for criticism throughout the epistle, not solely for their wealth but, as we have noted above, also for their actions in light of their wealth. James hints at this eschatology early in the epistle, when he compares the passing away of the rich to the fading of grass (1.9-10). In the end, he suggests, persons who now exert a great deal of power because of their wealth will be as inconsequential as blades of grass withering in the sun. This might be read as the kind of wisdom reflected in Ecclesiastes; after all, all persons will eventually die and their significance will diminish. However, in the rest of the epistle, James makes clear that this withering is evidence not of the mortality of the rich but of God's eschatological judgment. God's judgment will fall on the rich because of their praxes of injustice, specifically their treatment of poor laborers (5.1-6). Similarly, James's audience stand in danger of eschatological judgment for showing favoritism toward these rich people, who, James points out, consistently act coercively toward those in the community (2.1-12). These coercive actions underlie James's warning that 'judgment will be without mercy for those who show no mercy' (1.13). This is a reminder to his audience that all who act without mercy, especially the rich favored by a segment of the community, will be subject to the judgment at the imminent coming of the Christ.

In addition to the rich, James warns potential teachers that they too may be subject to condemnation in the inevitable day of judgment. Like the rich, James's community gives significant respect to teachers. However, James warns anyone who might want to be a teacher that judgment not only follows this rank but is also stricter than that facing the rest of the community (3.1). Judgment will be visited upon teachers who cannot control their tongues, whose speech denigrates other community members and exhibits envy and selfish ambition. Teachers such as these will face a significant change of status in the day of judgment, a denigration in proportion to the ways their speech are false to the truth.

## Visions of Hope

James's warnings about eschatological judgment, although pointed, are accompanied by the opportunity for change, for repentance, forgiveness and restoration before the imminent advent of Jesus Christ (4.9-10; 5.16, 19-20). Praxis again takes center stage. James does not explain the theological merits of or rationale behind forgiveness and repentance. Nor does he expand upon the theology of these praxes, like the authors of Matthew and Luke do when they, quoting Jesus, pronounce the blasphemy of the Holy Spirit unforgivable (cf. Mt. 12.31; Lk. 6.37). Rather, James teaches about praxis to a community that seems to share a common theology regarding the praxes of repentance, forgiveness and restoration. James counsels the community to continue in these praxes, which will prepare them to face that inevitable, imminent advent with hope rather than terror.

For many in James's community, the imminent advent of the Christ portends a time of hope and justice. This includes promises like the crown of life (1.12), a promise that must have seemed marvelous in a community with a median life-expectancy of 45 years if they made it past the first five years of life, which half of all infants in that time and geographical region did not (Carter 2006: 494). This promise of life, long or even eternal, would become a standard Christian hope and theological claim. James uses this tenet of faith and eschatological promise to remind the community that endurance as a praxis yields as its reward this coveted crown.

In addition to life, James reminds the community that God has promised the kingdom as an inheritance to the faithful poor. Does James counsel poverty as a praxis? Nothing in James's letter suggests this. Indeed, Jas 2.5 notes that the kingdom is promised both to the poor and to those who love God. James does pointedly remind the community of the folly of mistreating the poor who are to inherit the kingdom. Later, James also challenges whether or not the professed love of those within the community is genuine by calling them 'adulterous women', as noted above. But the call is not to voluntary poverty. Rather, James calls his community to a praxis of genuine, unadulterated love of God and to praxes of honor and justice for all people, especially the poor.

## The Praxis of Faith and the Nature of Community

James's theologically grounded counsel regarding the praxis of faith is written to a specific community. Clues in James's letter may reveal for us some characteristics of this specific historical community to which the letter was addressed. However, James's letter reveals more than potential historical information. James's letter also reveals his standards for an ideal community of Christ-followers, regardless of where it might be located. That is to

say, James's letter reveals something of his ecclesiology, his understanding of what it means to be 'church'.

Some specific historical information of James's community may be gleaned from the letter. First, James names this community 'the twelve tribes in diaspora' (1.2). As noted in Chapter 2, these 'twelve tribes' could refer to the more widely scattered Jewish community or communities that had been living outside of Jerusalem for generations, or to those Christ-followers who fled Judea after the initial persecution of the church, or to a combination of both. It could also be a rhetorical device used to designate the status of James's community as culturally set apart.

Whether this diaspora is real or rhetorical, the designation 'twelve tribes in diaspora' evokes a community of mainly Jewish Christ-followers who had maintained a culture and heritage at least partially influenced by Jerusalem, even if interpreted through cultural lenses shaped in diaspora (see Chapter 2). The community of faith self-identifies with Jewish history in general and the Jewish history of exile in particular. James notes that the community of faith gathers in synagogues for its rituals (2.14). Notably, James never uses the word 'Gentiles'; this is in stark contrast to the Gospels and all of the letters of the greater Pauline tradition (except 2 Thessalonians). This does not mean that James's community had no Gentiles. It does, however, suggest a community that was marked by a commonality of agreed upon cultural norms and self-identifications that stemmed from a form of first-century Judaism.

Beyond the historical traces, readers can discern in James's letter a pattern for a faith community that lives out the theology he espouses in their praxis of faith. According to James, Torah and the wider Scriptures of Judaism should underlie the theology and praxis of a faithful community (1.25; 2.8, 10-12). James's ethical admonitions are grounded in the Scriptures, including Leviticus 19 (which includes the familiar call to 'love your neighbor as yourself'), the Psalms and the prophetic traditions, among others. James clearly considers these writings authoritative for appropriate behaviors, and expects the community of faith to do the same. In addition, as noted above, James upholds the teachings of Jesus, particularly those from the Sermon on the Mount, which James combines with Torah and the rest of the Scriptures as critical guidelines for the praxis of faith (Witherington 2007: 394). James's position on Torah differs considerably from the majority position in the New Testament writings represented by Paul. In his letter to the Galatians, for example, Paul asserts that the Law served as a childcare provider until the community reached mature faith (Gal. 3.24-25). However, for James--who does not appear to be tackling the critical issues of circumcision and kashrut laws that bedeviled Paul's communities--one's faith is not divorced from one's praxis, and one's praxis, in turn, is governed by at least some of the provisions of Torah. These teachings form the

common ground upon which a community of faith may stand, even in the midst of diaspora.

The word diaspora, here, does not only signal a possible historical reality for this community. It also signals a marked difference between the community of faith and the world in which it is located. James counsels that a community of faith must maintain that difference, keeping itself 'unstained from the world' (1.27). Tellingly, in counseling the community to stand apart from the cultural norms in the place of its exile, James describes not only the bounds of the community but also what he understands to be an essential praxis of 'true religion' (1.27). For this reason, James's rhetoric explodes in condemnation of those who seem to be co-opted by the wider society's ideals by seeking to be friends with the 'world' (kosmos); James calls these people 'adulterous women' (4.1-5). Similarly, James's scorn for those who make plans about their future stems from the way in which their planning mirrors the ideals for commercial enterprise of the wider world without taking seriously their dependence on the God of their own Scriptures (4.13-16). For James, the community of faith must be different from the world into which it is dispersed, different not only in name but also in its praxis of an ethical faith. Anything else is unacceptable.

Unlike the many liturgical and communal roles discernible within the communities of the Pauline traditions (cf. 1 Corinthians 12), James's letter is notable for its relative lack of differentiation and hierarchy. The community members bear none of the names that would become common in the churches of the Pauline tradition: bishop, deacon, apostle, elder and 'widow' (which is likely an office that goes beyond a woman's marital status). Instead, as discussed before, all community members are addressed as brothers or sisters (e.g. 1.2; 2.15). A diaspora community of brothers and sisters needs to maintain the harmony of an ideal family--whose head is God--if it is to survive in a world of difference and possible hostility. Thus, James counsels against the kind of actions that can lead to dissension between family members: anger (1.19), partiality (2.1-9), careless speech (3.1-18), gossip and slander (4.11-12) and grumbling (5.9). Instead, he calls the community to praxes of taciturnity (1.19), gentleness and peacefulness (3.17-18), repentance (4.7-10), confession (5.16), and restoration (5.19-20)--that is, praxes that would hold a community of faith together. With such a vision of life together in peace, yet set aside from the world, it is no wonder that James became a favorite Scripture for monastic communities.

To be clear, James's ideal community is not leaderless. However, its leaders are not bishops, deacons or apostles. They are teachers. To these leaders, James devotes nearly one-fifth of his letter (3.1-18). James's concern is that these community leaders focus on the hard work of controlling their speech, not only in terms of its scriptural content but also in terms of its emotional and communal impact. Aware of the potential for harm caused

by careless or hurtful speech, and especially when that speech comes from a community leader, James makes particular effort to caution the community's teachers that they will face stricter judgment for their praxis of speech than all of the rest of the community (3.1-2). He then moves to a dire depiction of the impact of the tongue in community, as this member of the body is able to bless God an curse brothers and sisters made in God's image (3.9-10). This community-destroying speech emerges from selfish ambition and envy (3.14). By contrast, James counsels the community teachers and all who would be considered wise to live gently within the community, sowing a harvest of justice in peace by carrying out a praxis of peacemaking (3.13, 16-18).

Notably, James's description for teachers in the community does not contain specific personal criteria for leadership beyond the praxis of gentle speech and peacemaking. Unlike the later writings of the Pauline tradition (e.g. 1 Timothy), there are no marital, familial or other requirements of comportment. Neither is gender specified for the role of teacher, although certainly most teachers would have been male. Still, James's taciturnity on other criteria for leadership does not mean there were no such criteria. Rather, James, in lifting up particular criteria rather than others signals his sense of their singular importance for leaders of this community in diaspora that must remain separate from the world.

Two hallmarks mark the distinctiveness of James's ideal community of faith. First, a praxis of justice--in particular, care for and honor of the destitute--distinguishes the faithful community. This theme permeates every chapter of James's epistle. The community must not only maintain their distinctiveness from the world; in order to practice 'true religion', they must also tend to the most vulnerable among them: widows and orphans (1.27). Favoritism of the rich over the poor receives condemnation, both because the poor receive honor in the imminent kingdom of God and because of the unjust actions of the rich toward the community (2.5-7). Those who engage in unjust speech (3.1-18) or covetousness that leads to injustice between community members (4.1-3) receive chastisement. Those who withhold the wages of the poor and who cause the innocent to be sentenced to death face imminent eschatological catastrophe (5.1-6). James envisions a community in which faithfulness is demonstrated through just relations. Nothing less is acceptable.

Second, the faithful community is known by its endurance in the face of trial (1.2-7; 5.7-11). This theme begins and ends James's remarks, but he does little to elaborate upon it directly. However, traces of possible trials can be discerned in James's epistle. Some of these trials appear to be internal; for example, the trial of temptation and desire (1.14-15). This trial may also be linked to a wider desire to be a part of the 'world' (kosmos) rather than be separate from it (cf. James 4). Other trials seem to emerge from the

rich who interact with the community. These include maligning 'the name that was invoked' over the community, garnishing or withholding wages, lawsuits, imprisonment and even death (2.6-7; 5.4, 6). By contrast, at least some community members appear be in danger of destitution (2.15-17). For whatever other trials the community might be facing, James gives no hints, but he expects the response to trials to be prayer and endurance, using Job as the example of the latter. The community's endurance allows it to maintain its diaspora character, separate from and unstained by the world, regardless of what it costs them in business dealings and in social capital. Their endurance demonstrates their character as a community of faithfulness, regardless of the cost.

Luther's epithet and Dibelius's dismissal have cast a long shadow on the epistle of James, leaving its ethical riches on the praxis of faith community largely untapped in many branches of Christianity, particularly those of the Protestant and Anabaptist traditions. For this reason, Elsa Tamez famously calls James an 'intercepted letter' (Tamez 2002: 1). Luther's and Dibelius's influence notwithstanding, James presents an epistle that could still be helpful today, not so much in the theological definition of the contours of Christian faith but, certainly as important, in the ethical living out of that faith in the face of contemporary challenges. James's most pointed and controversial charge still haunts the church today. Perhaps, today, he might have worded it this way. Systematic theologies matter little if one doesn't act on them. Theology, even faithful theology, without praxis is dead.

# JAMES AND KYRIARCHY

The epistle of James is filled with examples of ethics for first-century Christ-followers, calling the community of faith to a particular praxis of religion. Yet, the epistle of James also emerges out of a society with a set of cultural norms, all of which may not be considered ethical today. We have already caught glimpses of those norms as we considered James's use of the word 'slave' to describe himself. Slavery, culturally accepted in the ancient world, found its way into the biblical texts largely uncriticized, and in many places and times even upheld as the normal state of being.

That a book of the Bible should contain these cultural norms is not surprising. Whether or not one accepts the theological assertion that these books were divinely inspired, they were nevertheless written by human beings in particular times and places, speaking from within particular cultures. Within the first century CE, the biblical world under Roman occupation was a world of kyriarchy. 'Kyriarchy', a neologism coined by Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza, describes 'the rule of the emperor, lord, slave master, husband, or the elite freeborn, propertied, educated gentleman to whom disenfranchised men and all wo/men were subordinated' (Schüssler Fiorenza 2009: 9). The entire social structure presumed levels of power and status, from the beggar and the slave to the emperor and the gods. Within each category, women were to be subservient to men and children to adults. However, the wife of the master would have more power than the most important adult male slave or beggar.

So what is the relationship between the epistle of James and kyriarchy? The answer: 'It's complicated.' After all, in the end all acts of power and domination in the ancient world fell under the larger category of kyriarchy. Against some of these acts of power, like acts of power against the poor, James's epistle is highly critical. However, in the face of gender and particularly the role of women, the epistle unquestioningly follows the norms of its day. At the same time, in the face of the politically oppressive status of exile--James is written to 'the twelve tribes in Diaspora'--James proposes an alternative to the unnamed but ever present Roman Empire. Yet, that alternative directly mimics the imperial kyriarchal structure to which it is supposed to be an alternative.

This chapter deals with these varying degrees of interaction with kyriarchy found in James. Its intention is first illustrative. James is a document of its time, not only because of its language and culture but also because of the social structures it presupposes. However, this chapter is also an invitation to a different kind of engagement of this text. Without considering the ways in which James's vision of the world reinscribes kyriarchy, those who hold this ancient text to be sacred could uncritically follow James and use this text to reinscribe the oppression of some forms of kyriarchy. By understanding James's critique of the injustice found within the contemporary kyriarchy of his day, readers too will be able to raise their voices against parallel kyriarchal injustices of their own day.

## James and Class: Critiquing Kyriarchy

Our first exploration of kyriarchy in James concerns the matter of class and economics. We have already begun this discussion in Chapter 3, as we considered the problematic use of slavery as a metaphor for the relationship between God and humanity in James. However, the question of economics in James is much bigger than slavery, and James's instruction to the community about economics represents a sharp critique of a society in which the vast majority of persons lived at or below basic subsistence. In Chapter 3, we explored the question of wealth and poverty in terms of community ethical praxis. However, to really understand James's critique, it will be necessary to take a step back and examine the structure of ancient society. Only then will we be able to understand how James's counsel about wealth, business practices and the treatment of the poor serve as a critique of the economic kyriarchy of his day.

According to the United States census bureau, $15\%$ of the population of the United States lived in poverty in 2012 (United States Census). Many in the United States and in the global north generally find these numbers unacceptably high. Thus, few of us can comprehend the level of poverty with which James and his audience would have been familiar in the first century CE around the Mediterranean basin. Warren Carter (2006) helps to put James's discussions about economics in context by laying out some statistics about poverty in the ancient Mediterranean around the time of Jesus, Paul and James.

According to Carter, the ruling elite of Rome was comprised of $2\%$ of the total population (2006: 492). These persons, provincial elites and Roman rulers, controlled all of the substance of the empire: its goods, its money and its power. This meant widespread poverty was the norm rather than the exception. Carter estimates that $34\%$ of the population were marginal economically, cycling above and below subsistence-level poverty; $20\%$ were 'in permanent crisis'; and $4\%$ to $8\%$ were beggars (2006: 492). In other

words, James's society would have had a poverty rate of between $44\%$ and $62\%$ at any given time. Or, to put it another way, on average, five of every ten persons in James's communities were poor. It is no wonder that the Lord's Prayer in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke includes a prayer for 'daily bread'. For about half of the population at any given time, daily bread was not assured.

For the poor, survival might entail securing for oneself a patron from among the elites of society. Such a person could be solicited for favors that might include money, food, protection or legal help, for example. In exchange, the poor person would show gratitude through public praise, loyalty (read: faith), and doing whatever the elite person required of them (deSilva 2000: 115-18). Alicia Batten notes that this 'patron-client model formed the backdrop for most exchanges of goods and services between people of unequal social status, with the stronger party generally controlling the nature of the exchange. This exchange could, and in many cases did, become overtly exploitative' (Batten 2007: 11). The poor would be continuously beholden to their patrons, willing to do any small act to demonstrate their gratitude for the grace bestowed on them, while the rich felt it within their rights to exploit the poor who owed them everything.

Poverty was made even worse by regressive forms of taxation. The poor found themselves taxed by regional elites, religious centers and Rome, a triple-taxation burden that increasingly meant the loss of family lands and inheritance. K.C. Hanson and Douglas Oakman assert that 'taxation in Roman Palestine was extractive, that is, designed to assert elite control over agrarian production... [Its] major impact was to remove most goods from the control and enjoyment of most people...the benefits in ancient economy flowed "upward" to the advantage of the elites' (1996: 116). The poorest of the poor, already struggling to survive, were taxed more deeply into debt. Those who went into debt could find themselves in court sued for their last remaining possession: their clothes (cf. Mt. 5.40).

Some of the poor fell so far into debt that they sold themselves, or were sold by those to whom they owed money, into slavery, a brutal institution even in the first century CE (cf. Lk. 12.47). Many more of the poor worked as day laborers, making just enough money to survive for short periods of time. As found in the Gospels of the New Testament, Jesus tells parables of these persons. One of the best known is of the workers in the vineyard who agree to the standard day's wage: a denarius (Mt. 20.1-8). Elsa Tamez notes that day laborers of the first century were some of the most vulnerable of society:

In many cases slaves had more protection than the laborers, because the slaves could at least depend on food and shelter from their owners. The laborers, on the other hand, depended completely on their salaries. In the times of Jesus...there were more day laborers than slaves. Day laborers

earned on the average a denarius, that is to say, the minimum needed for one day's survival, including their meal (2002: 15).

A day laborer without work for a few days, or one who developed an inability to work because of a physical disability, quickly transitioned to the status of a beggar. James 2 and 4.1-5.6 should be read with this economic context in mind, for this context supported the kyriarchy in which members of James's diaspora community found themselves. The 'man with gold rings and in fine clothes' (2.2) would certainly have represented the rare exception among those entering the worship gatherings of James's audience. More commonly found within the community, simply because of the nature of the society, would have been the 'poor person in dirty clothes' (2.2). It would have been standard cultural practice among James's audience to show favoritism to the wealthy man; such favoritism would have been seen as an appropriate response to the grace of his presence. Such 'appropriate' treatment could have resulted in patronage in the form of protection, financial or medical help, or any other kind of help. Of course, there would be 'strings attached' to this help, but such was the economy of the patronage system. As Johnson puts it, 'the community as a whole has suffered from those "acts of favoritism" by which the wheels of the world are greased: they have suffered at the hands of "judges with evil designs" [Jas 2.4] instigated by the powerful machinations of the rich' (Johnson 1995: 229).

James stands firmly against his audience's co-optation into the economic structural kyriarchy of his day. He rails against favoritism toward persons of wealth as a violation of the 'royal law according to the Scripture, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (2.8). He exposes the exploitative practices of the richest of the rich, those who take his community members to court, and who insult 'the excellent name that was invoked over you' (2.7). Later in 4.13-16, James takes up the theme again, mocking the merchant class for their boasting about how they will make money, as if they were in charge of their own fate. Then James takes on those who exploit the day laborers and announces, 'Listen! The wages of the laborers who mowed your fields, which you have kept back by fraud, cry out and the cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts' (5.4). This is a prophetic warning, a call to repent because, as James reminds the community, the Lord who hears the cry of the poor is very near (5.7-8).

But James goes beyond issuing a critique of the kyriarchy of his day. He calls his audience to live 'unstained by the world' (1.27). The favoritism in James 2 demonstrates that some members of the community, having been victimized by the wealthy elites, might 'have adopted the attitudes of the oppressors against their own member' (Johnson 1995: 229). The hubris of the merchants in James 4 shows that the attitudes of the world have begun to infect the merchant class and the rich of his community, leading them to arrogance and oppressive actions against the poorest of the poor. In the face

of these near and very real temptations, James cautions the community not to capitulate. Alicia Batten is correct in stating that James is not calling for a revolution here. 'James does not want his audience to go out and change the world,' she writes, 'but to remain unblemished by it' (Batten 2007: 25). Still, even such a stance would have been a significant shift from the standard practices of James's day.

At the same time, James takes on community prejudices surrounding poverty. He not only challenges the economic kyriarchy but also the cultural values of honor and shame attached to wealth and poverty, respectively. To understand James's reversal, we must first understand that wealth was often considered to be the tangible evidence of God's blessings of God's people, and impoverishment was considered a sign of God's displeasure. Thus, the most valuable of limited commodities, honor, would have been ascribed to the rich just on the basis of their wealth. When James rails against giving a rich man in fine clothes with gold rings a place of honor in the assembled Christian community, he does not need to be speaking about a specific incident or a specific person. This would have been a common cultural practice. Instead, James is speaking against a kyriarchal structure in which the rich, by virtue of their wealth, are ascribed more honor and thus treated with more honor than the poor.

Alicia Batten reminds us that James's reversal may not have been meant literally. The language of the epistle shows that James, the preacher, clearly knows his prophets and the prophetic tradition of stereotyping all rich persons as evil or unjust. Batten notes that rich people, in James, 'could simply function as an example of what James's listeners are not or should not be' (2007: 19). By contrast, other commentators agree with Elsa Tamez that James is being quite literal and, given the ancient structures of James's day, it is possible that she is correct.

Literal or not, James's language would not only have been shocking in its condemnation of the rich, it would also have been equally shocking in its celebration of the poor. As mentioned above, if the rich were seen as examples of divine favor, the poor, by contrast, would have exemplified divine displeasure. Persons from such a culture would have been taken aback by James's charge that they were in error for dishonoring the poor (2.6a). James does not use the Greek word for the working poor: penês. Instead, James calls his community to honor the ptôchoi--that is, the destitute. As Tamez notes, this Greek term designates the poorest of the poor within the ancient world, 'those who totally lacked the means of subsistence and lived from alms; they were the beggars' (2002: 19). James goes beyond naming these poorest of the poor 'honorable', he argues that God has chosen these destitute women and men to be models of the kind of faithfulness that clients typically show their patrons. These poorest of the poor are, according to James, heirs of God's own kingdom (2.5).
