# Chapter Thirteen

THE DANCERS WERE DEMONSTRATING that Happy Days Were Here Again all over the stage in unitards and leg warmers that Libby thought had gone out with Irene Cara. The rehearsal pianist, who was also the musical director, was shouting at them, as was the choreographer. The dancers were, apparently, taking notice of neither.

'How did the meeting with Danny go?'

Libby swung round to face Peter.

'Eh?'

'Harry told me.' He grinned and chucked her under the chin. 'Can't keep anything from me, the silly boy. Are you going to help?'

'That's debatable,' said Libby, throwing her cape onto the back of one of the seats.

'Surely you're not losing interest?' Peter unwound his scarf and bent a sardonic gaze on her.

'No, of course not.' Libby was indignant. 'But I think Fran is.'

Peter raised his eyebrows. 'Dear, dear. Fed up with us, is she?'

'What makes you say that?' asked Libby, although remembering Peter's attitude when Fran first came among them, she thought she knew.

'Oh, I don't know.' Peter shrugged. 'But she won't be in Steeple Martin for much longer, will she?'

'She'll only be in Nethergate.' Now, illogically, Libby wanted to stand up for Fran.

'And apart from last summer's little escapade, how often do you go to Nethergate?'

'When I need to see Guy. And Ben's taken me to The Sloop.'

'Once? And how often will Fran need to come here?'

'Whenever she wants to see us - me. And I'll go there.'

'Not the same as living within walking distance, is it?' said Peter, sitting down and propping his long legs on the back of the seats in front. 'Can't pop out for a drink together.'

Libby sent him a fulminating look and stomped off to the stage.

'Can we start, please?' she said to the choreographer, who gave her a look of weary gratitude.

'Beginners, then, please,' yelled Libby. 'Fairy Queen? Are you there?'

The Fairy Queen appeared stage right in confusion and a flurry of draperies, and peered short-sightedly into the auditorium. Libby wished for the umpteenth time she'd stuck to her guns with Peter and insisted on playing the part herself.

'OK,' she said. 'Off you go. Chorus positions, please, and remember, don't move.'

'But we haven't got the gauze yet, Libby,' said one plaintive voice. 'It doesn't matter.'

'If you get into the habit of not moving now it won't come so hard when the gauze is in place with an audience out front,' said Libby patiently. 'Tabs, please.'

The curtains were closed between the Fairy Queen and the chorus, and opened slowly as the opening monologue was delivered, somewhat hesitantly. The chorus, discovered outside Dame Trot's house, stood in sulky positions and scratched noses, heads and bottoms. Mostly their own. Libby sighed.

The rehearsal wound its weary way to the end of the first scene and Libby went to the front to give notes. She knew there wasn't a lot of point at this stage, but there were one or two habits she had to correct. None of these, she was forced to admit, belonged to Fran.

Finally, at just after ten o'clock, she called a halt.

'Pub?' said Fran, as Libby climbed onto the stage to talk to the crew.

Tempted to say "Don't we always?" Libby swallowed and smiled. 'See you there,' she said.

'Unusually diplomatic,' murmured Peter in her ear.

'Oh, shut up,' said Libby, and went over to the construction team who were sucking their collective teeth over the state of the

beanstalk.

Leaving them soothed, and with the promise that they would lock up when they left. Libby joined Ben at the auditorium doors.

'Pub?' he said.

'I said I'd see Fran there,' said Libby.

'Ah. Forgiven her, have you?' Ben held open the glass doors and then went out into the winter air.

'Pete thinks the same as me,' said Libby.

'He was always prejudiced against her, you know that,' said Ben. 'I think you should both give her a chance. Her life has changed dramatically since she moved down here, and I expect it's quite hard for her to come to terms with that, without having someone else's problems to deal with, too.'

Libby tucked her arm through his as they reached the bottom of the theatre drive. 'Especially as looking in to a family whose existence was never known must bring it all back, being so similar to her own experience.'

'That's my girl,' said Ben, and kissed her cheek. 'Let her find her feet.'

'Pete says she won't bother to keep up with us once she's moved to Nethergate,' said Libby, as they reached the pub.

'Rubbish,' said Ben. pushing the door open. 'Now, go on, make your peace.'

Fran behaved as if nothing had happened, so Libby was able to do the same, and when Fran asked if she would like to go to March Cottage the following morning, agreed quickly.

'I thought we'd give it one more shot and look for references to Anderson Place,' said Fran, 'which was what you wanted to do, wasn't it?'

'Well, yes, but not if you don't think it's worth it,' said Libby, generously.

'I think it will be,' said Fran, with a smile, 'but I'm not sure just how.'

'There,' said Ben, as he and Libby walked back to Allhallow's Lane. 'All patched up.'

'Well,it wasn't really a row,'said Libby.

'It wasn't at all a row on Fran's part,' said Ben. 'It was you feeling, as you said, sidelined.'

Libby nodded. 'I still do, a bit, but I know it's not really Fran's fault. I shall be determinedly bright and cheery in the morning.'

'Not too much or she'll wonder what's wrong with you,' said Ben, giving her a squeeze and opening the front door of Number 17. 'In you go, and get Sidney out of the way before he tries to trip me up again.'

Libby walked round to The Pink Geranium in the morning and found Fran washing the windows of the Roller-skate.

'You've only had it five minutes,' said Libby, watching admiringly.

'It's winter,' said Fran. 'The windows were filthy.'

Libby thought fleetingly of Romeo's besmirched windows. 'As long as we can see our way to Heronsbourne,' she said.

'Beautifully,' said Fran with a grin. 'Hop in.'

'Will you still come and see us when you've moved to Nethergate?' asked Libby as they bowled along the road past Steeple Mount.

Fran gave her a quick, surprised look. 'Of course I will. Why on earth wouldn't I?'

'It won't be like living round the corner.'

'We've only lived round the corner from each other for the last few months.'

'We've only known each other for the last few months.' Libby turned and smiled at her friend. 'But it's made such a difference to me.'

'It's made more than a difference to me, you know that,' said Fran, 'and I'd hope we would never lose that friendship. Anyway, you can have your Steeple Martin life back, now, and I'll take over Nethergate. If we want a drink when we see each other, we've both got spare rooms.'

'That's true.' Libby gave sigh of relief. 'I feel better now.'

'Good.' Fran slid a sideways look at her. 'Now we can concentrate on Laurence and Danny.'

'And Bella?'

'Well, her, too, but it's not actually anything to do with her, is it?'

'She's the catalyst. None of this would have happened

without her.'

'Laurence would still have been killed, and Harry would still have got in touch with us.' Fran turned into Pedlar's Row and drew up outside March Cottage.

'That's true, too,' said Libby, much struck. 'But we wouldn't have known about old Sir Fred, would we?'

'By now we would,' said Fran, getting out of the car. 'We looked it up yesterday, didn't we?'

'Oh, yes. I'm getting muddled.'

'Come on, then,' said Fran. 'let's go and get the keys from the pub.'

George was pleased to see them and asked after Bella.

'Nice lady,' he said. 'Reckon she'll move down here permanent, like?'

'No idea,' said Libby, hoisting herself onto a bar stool and settling down for a chat. 'She's got children at school in London-'

'Has she?' George looked surprised.

'Doing A and O levels,' nodded Libby. 'She won't want to leave them.'

"What about her husband, then?" said George.

'Well-' said Libby.

'Libby, are you coming?' said Fran. 'We don't want to be all day.'

'OK. Fran, you go ahead. I'll follow,' said Libby.

Fran shook her head and left with the keys.

'Right,' continued Libby, resting her elbows on the bar. 'Her husband. We don't think they get on. I don't think he wants her to move down here.'

'Oh, that's a shame,' said George, propping a foot up on a shelf behind the counter. 'She'd fit in here real well. Nice quiet bunch the folks here are. And I wouldn't want to see March Cottage go to any of them weekenders.'

'I think that's what it will be, for the time being at least. I don't think Bella will sell it, but she'll only be able to get down now and then.'

That's all right, then. We can keep an eye on it for her. She's not like a proper weekender, is she?' George shook his head. And she's got kids. Somehow I didn't think of her with

youngsters.'

'No, me neither. She looks -' Libby stopped.

'Yeah.' George grinned. 'I know what you mean. I thought she might be a young grannie, though.'

'Oh, dear,' said Libby. 'Aren't we awful? I'd better go.' She slid off her stool. 'See you later, George.'

Fran was already in the outbuilding with the computer and the heater switched on.

'Everything isn't catalogued here, you know,' she said as Libby came in. 'There's loads more stuff in the box files than there is on the computer. We'd better go through it.'

'Why is that, do you think?' said Libby, unwinding her scarf and shrugging off her cape.

'It's mainly from the early days. Maria wasn't born then, so I suppose she didn't bother. Afterwards there's a lot of detail about the costumes and the different shows. And both of them were members of something called the Concert Artistes' Association.'

'Really?' Libby leant over Fran's shoulder and peered at the screen. 'I know a bit about them. They've got a building in Bedford Street in London.'

'Oh, yes, I vaguely remember. I think I went there once for a meeting with someone about cruise ships.'

'What were you going to do? I didn't think you sang,' said Libby, looking at Fran in surprise.

'Thanks,' said Fran. 'What is it I do in the panto? Croak?'

'That's not proper singing,' said Libby. 'If you're a production singer on a cruise ship you have to be a proper singer.'

'I wasn't going to be a production singer,' said Fran. 'Somebody wanted to put on small cast plays rather than the musical shows they do. It didn't work out.'

'Oh, pity,' said Libby. 'Still, you might have been sea sick.'

Fran looked at Libby and shook her head. 'What an outlook you've got,' she said.

'Always look on the bright side,' said Libby, and began humming.

'Come on then, get those box files out,' said Fran, pushing back her chair.

There were several box files holding material before 1914, as Fran had said.

'What I can't understand,' said Libby as she blew dust off one of them and sneezed. 'is why Bella only found those bits and pieces she showed you the other night.'

'There's only one folder on the computer labelled "up to 1920s"', said Fran, 'and that box file's over here. The others aren't labelled. I think Maria just stuffed everything else she found in there in any old order.'

'Oh, good,' groaned Libby. 'That means we've got to go through the lot?'

'What I think,' said Fran, sitting on the floor surrounded by box files. 'is that Maria filtered out those few leaflets for the Silver Serenaders, the notebook and the letter referring to Sir Fred because they were things she knew about. She just left the rest alone.'

'Why didn't she throw them all out?' Libby looked at the files in disgust.

'Whether it meant anything to her or not, it all belonged to her parents,' said Fran. 'and she was obviously a hoarder.'

'Only in this,' said Libby. 'Those bedrooms in the cottage are as clean as a whistle.'

'Her history meant a lot to her,' said Fran, opening a file. 'Come on, let's get on with it.'

It soon became apparent why Maria had only catalogued the few items they had already seen. Most of the rest were of little interest to anyone but a social historian. Receipts for material, for sewing, for boots and mending, letters of engagement and a few postcards from artistes enquiring about the next season, or just enquiring after Dorinda and Peter's health. The only thing Fran found remotely interesting was the correspondence between Dorinda and the council, first negotiating for her "pitch", and subsequently for the land on which she built the Alexandria. To her disappointment, there were no original plans or correspondence with builders, but the appearance of a programme for the Alexandria dated 1912 indicated that it was in existence by then.

'Well,' said Libby eventually, brushing dust and cobwebs off her face, 'there's nothing here.'

'What about the newspapers?' asked Fran, indicating a file they had put aside.

'Oh, no,' said Libby, 'we can't go through all of those.'

'Not now, maybe, but perhaps we could take them home and go through them?'

'We?' Libby glowered. 'You can. I'm not. I've got other things to do at home.'

'You're the one who wanted to become an investigator.'

Libby glowered some more. 'Oh, all right,' she said. 'But Bella might not want to let us take them away.'

'I'll ring her now,' said Fran, scrambling to her feet.

'Right,' said Libby, following her example. She began to put the files back on the shelves and stopped when she heard Fran speak.

'Well?' she said, when Fran switched off.

'She says that's fine, she knows we'll look after them, and had we found out anything more. You heard me tell her all about Laurence.'

'And?'

'She didn't know anything about him, but we didn't expect her to, did we?'

'When's she next coming down?'

'She wasn't sure. She sounded very dithery.'

'That's Orrible Andrew getting to her,' said Libby. 'And now it's nearly Christmas she won't be able to get down here at all, bet you.'

Fran nodded and sighed. 'Oh, well, let's take this lot out to the car.'

After getting rid of Balzac, who had followed them in and gone to sleep by the heater, they turned off the computer, lights and heater and locked up.

George offered them a drink when they took the keys back, but Fran said sensibly she was driving and they ought to get back home. Libby pulled a face and, waving to George, followed Fran back to the car.

'Sorry if you wanted to stay,' said Fran, as she drove back towards Steeple Martin, 'but I want to get on with those papers. I've got a feeling we might find something in them.'

'Something about the building works? Would they print

planning applications like they do today?"

'I don't know, but I didn't mean that. There must be a reason for Dorinda to have kept all those papers.'

'They might fall to pieces,' said Libby. 'They should be preserved in a museum.'

'I expect they are, somewhere,' said Fran. 'Newspaper archives have copies of everything, don't they? Local and national papers.'

'Oh, yes,' said Libby, looking wise.

'Anyway, we'll go through them and see if anything turns up,' said Fran.

"What exactly are we looking for?"

'Anything relevant. Anything about Dorinda, or Peter, or Sir Frederick or - what were they called? The family?'

'Oh, heavens,' said Libby. 'I can't remember.'

They both thought for a moment, until Fran turned into Allhallow's Lane and pulled up outside Number 17.

'Here, you take half of them,' she said leaning over and retrieving the file from the back seat.

'Thanks,' said Libby, looking with disfavour on the yellowing bundle she was given.

'They weren't Andersons, were they?' said Fran.

'Who? The family? No. Bella would have noticed that.'

'Of course she would. I wonder what the connection is.' Fran stared out through the windscreen as if she might find the answer in the Manor woods before her.

'People they met and made friends with?' suggested Libby. 'They were here from 1904, and Peter was probably here with the other troupe before then. They must have known a lot of people.'

'But not titled people. They wouldn't have mixed with theatricals.'

What about stage door johnnies? Libby turned excitedly to her friend. 'I bet that's it! Sir Fred and Ivy - well that would be it, wouldn't it? A friend of Dorinda's perhaps, someone who'd been in The Serenaders or The Alexandrians, maybe went on into the chorus at one of the London theatres - and Sir Fred married her! It was always happening.'

Fran looked interested. 'It certainly could be. So nothing to

do with Dorinda and the family at all?'

'Oh.' Libby's face fell. 'Yes, of course. Oh, bugger.'

'But you're right, Lib,' said Fran, 'it is by far the most likely and obvious explanation. I don't know why we didn't think of it before.'

'Because we were too busy looking for connections,' said Libby. 'That'll teach us.'

'Go and find me some more connections to shoot down.' Fran grinned. 'And I'll see you tonight.'

# Chapter Fourteen

LIBBY WAS TRYING TO keep awake over the brittle copies of the newspapers when her phone rang.

'Lib?'

'Harry. What's up?'

'Danny just called. I don't know how important this is to you, or Fran, or - well, the fact is, the police have just been back on to Danny.'

'Go on.'

'Dorothy's dead.'

'Huh? Dorothy?'

'The sister.'

'Oh! Dorothy. Good God.' Libby sat down suddenly on the sofa.

'As far as Danny can make out, the police went back to talk to her and found her dead in her house.'

'Murdered?'

'It looks like it.'

'Have they arrested Danny?'

'No, but she lives a long way away, and I suppose they've been keeping tabs on him, so he couldn't have got there without them knowing.'

'Where does she live?'

'I don't know, do I?' said Harry testily.

'Sorry.' Libby thought for a moment. 'Have you told Fran?'

'No. You can tell her. Much as I like her. I don't always find her sympathetic. She makes me feel as though she can see right through me.'

'Really?' Surprised at this further evidence of her friends' attitudes towards Fran, Libby felt obliged to defend her. 'She can't, you know. I wish she could sometimes, but she's as full of insecurities as we all are. More, actually.' She thought of Guy.

'I know,' said Harry, sounding uncomfortable, 'and I really like her, otherwise I wouldn't be happy to have her upstairs, would I? And if she could find anything out for Danny it'd be great.'

'Right,' said Libby. 'I'll tell her, and see what she says. Although I don't see how it helps.'

Harry sighed. 'Neither do I. Bugger, isn't it?'

After Harry had rung off, Libby punched in Fran's number.

'We have a development,' she announced.

'In the papers?'

'No,' said Libby, and explained.

'Hello?' she said, after a prolonged period of silence. 'Fran?'

'Do we know who their parents were?' Fran said finally.

'What?'

'Laurence and Dorothy. Who were their parents?'

'How on earth am I supposed to know?' demanded Libby. 'Or Danny, come to that.'

'Can we ask him? And how was she murdered? And where did she live?'

'Oh, good lord, Fran! How on earth can we find all that out? Danny won't know - well, I suppose he might know about the parents, but not about anything else. You're the best person to find out, with your connection to Inspector Connell.'

'I can't ask him.'

'Of course you can!' said Libby in exasperation. 'The last thing he said to you in my hearing was, "You won't forget to let me know, will you? Anything at all." Now, from your silence just now, I guess you must have had a bit of a moment when I told you about Dorothy. So, tell him.'

Fran was quiet again. Eventually, Libby heard her sigh. 'I suppose so. I feel the parents are important. Perhaps Laurence's mother was an Anderson?'

'That would have come out by now, Fran. A Walker, perhaps? No, that would have come out, too.'

'You're right. I'll call the Inspector. I'll let you know what he says.'

After Fran had rung off, Libby sat for a long time gazing into the fire, until Sidney reminded her of the time. She cast a look of dislike at the papers still spread out over the table in the window

next to the computer and went to make a cup of tea and put something in the oven. Sidney was given his afternoon tea after which he took an evening constitutional round the garden. Libby watched his ghost-like shape through the conservatory windows.

Something was wrong. Fran was not herself, although Libby wasn't quite sure what Fran's real self was, their association having been forged during a series of quite abnormal events. Ben was right, Fran's life had changed completely since they'd met, far more than Libby's had, and maybe it was difficult for her to come to terms with it. Perhaps it was becoming involved with a murder investigation as an outsider. It did make one feel rather like a voyeur. Libby decided, which wasn't a pleasant feeling. Was that how Fran felt?

In the little flat over The Pink Geranium, Fran was feeling exactly like that. And more. She was experiencing a horrid, stomach churning certainty that somehow Bella was concerned in the murder. No, that wasn't quite right, she thought, pacing up and down the small living room. Not concerned, exactly, but affected by it.

Which, of course, was ridiculous. Of course she was affected by it--Bella had found the body, in premises she now owned. But Fran felt sure there was more to it than that. When Libby had told her about Laurence Cooper's sister's death, she had experienced the same black suffocation that had overcome her when she heard about her own aunt's death, and that of the second murder victim in that case, not to mention when she had gone to see the Alexandria, which indicated that this, too, was murder. And therefore, a legitimate reason to ring Inspector Connell.

And that was the other problem. Fran was aware of a guilty thrill of excitement at having an excuse to ring Inspector Connell. The thought of someone's murder being an excuse to speak to someone to whom you were, however unwillingly, attracted, made her feel physically sick. Not only that, Guy and she were, in most people's eyes certainly his an "item". This was not only slightly perverted, but unfaithful, if you had always been a one-man woman as Fran had. Not that she and Guy had even slept together, let alone given each other any sort of commitment, as Fran was as wary of middle-aged romantic

entanglements as Libby had been only a few months ago. In fact, it still astonished her that she should be in this position.

She knew, too, that her new friends, particularly Libby, Peter and the lovely Harry were finding her difficult. Never good at giving much of herself, except when she was playing a part in her former life as a professional actor, she didn't know what to do about this. Libby would have sat down and poured her heart out, not that anyone had much difficulty in seeing what was in Libby's heart, as it was usually on her sleeve.

Her phone rang. Fran fished it out of her handbag.

'Mrs Castle? Connell here.'

Fran's heart went down in a lift. Why didn't she check who was calling before answering? The simple answer was if she hadn't got her glasses on she wouldn't be able to see the screen.

'Hello, Inspector,' she said.

'I probably shouldn't be telling you this, but in case it - er - strikes any chords with you, our victim's sister has been found murdered.'

'How?' asked Fran, just managing to bite back the words "I know".

'How?' Connell sounded surprised. 'Hit on the head, as far as we know.'

'Where?'

'At her home. Look, Mrs Castle, do you know something about this?'

Fran paused, collecting her thoughts. 'I was going to call you,' she said finally. 'Apparently, my landlord knew the first victim.'

'You should have told me,' said Connell accusingly.

'Not well, only as a business acquaintance,' said Fran, crossing her fingers. 'But he knows Danny rather better.'

'Danny?'

'I don't know his surname,' said Fran.

'Danny Lee,' growled Connell.

'Ah,' said Fran.

'So what else do you know?' Connell's tone was now glacial.

'Danny told Harry - that's my landlord - that Dorothy had been found dead. He didn't know any more than that. Danny hasn't anyone else to talk to, that's why he told Harry, as a

fellow restaurateur.'

'Chef at The Pink Geranium, isn't he?'

'Owner of The Pink Geranium,' corrected Fran.

"So, why were you going to call me, Mrs Castle?"

'Because I thought Dorothy had been murdered, Inspector.'

'Thought, or felt?'

'Felt.'

'But we know that anyway. Nothing else?'

'No.' Fran hesitated. 'I can't find anything linking Laurence Cooper to Mrs Morleigh or her family, either, I'm afraid, or to Anderson Place.'

'He worked there,' said Connell sharply, 'of course he's connected to the place.'

'Other than that,' said Fran, wondering if she'd said too much.

'You think there's some other connection?'

'No - I just said - I can't find a connection.'

'But you think there is one?'

Now Fran knew she'd said too much. 'I don't know,' she said honestly. 'I'm not a magician, Inspector. I can only tell you what I feel, or see.'

'Right.' He was silent for so long Fran wondered if she'd been cut off. 'Is there anything else you'd like to know, Mrs Castle? Anything you think might help you feel, or see, something?'

Fran sat down in surprise. 'Oh. Well, what was Dorothy's surname? Was she a Cooper?'

'No, she was a widow. Name of Buller.'

'Where did she live?'

'Yorkshire. Near Richmond.'

'And where did the Coopers live as children?'

'I've no idea!' said Connell. 'Is it relevant?'

'I don't know, but I think it might be. Had anything been taken from her house?'

'Yes, it had been ransacked. We don't have any idea what has been taken. The only one who could have told us was her brother. She had no children.'

'Neither did he. How sad,' said Fran.

'According to her neighbours - and to Danny Lee, as a
