- PatsyHealey,Abdul Khakee,Alain Motte, BarrieNeedham and contributors 1997

This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. No reproduction without permission. All rights reserved.

First published in1997by UCLPressUCLPressLimited 1 Gunpowder Square London EC4A 3DE and 1900FrostRoad,Suite 101BristolPennsylvania 19007-1598USA

This edition published in the Taylor&amp;Francis e-Library,2006.

"To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor &amp; Francis or Routledge's collection of thousands of eBooks please go to http://www.ebookstore.tandf.co.uk/."

The name of University College London (UCL) is a registered trademarkusedby UCLPresswith theconsent oftheowner.

## British Library Cataloguing-in-PublicationData

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data are available

ISBN0-203-45150-3Mastere-bookISBN

ISBN0-203-45873-7(AdobeeReaderFormat) ISBNs:1-85728-663-4(PrintEdition)HB 1-85728-664-2(PrintEdition)PB

Every effort hasbeen made to contact copyright holders for their permission to reprint material in this book. The publishers would be grateful to hear from any copyright holder who is not here acknowledged and will undertake to rectify any errors or omissions in future editions of this book.

## CONTENTS

| Acknowledgements                                                                                                                 | vii   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| List of contributors                                                                                                             | ix    |
| PARTI                                                                                                                            |       |
| 1 Therevival of strategic spatial planning inEurope PatsyHealey                                                                  | 3     |
| 2 An institutionalist approach to spatial planning PatsyHealey                                                                   | 20    |
| PARTII                                                                                                                           |       |
| 3A plan of hope and glory An example of development planning in Denmark afterMaastricht IbJorgensen,FinnKjrsdam,JanNielsen       | 38    |
| 4 Building strategic urban planning in France The Lyon urban area 1981-93 experiments AlainMotte                                 | 57    |
| 5 Images as institution builders Metropolitan planning in Madrid MichaelNeuman                                                   | 75    |
| 6 Buildingnewinstitutionsfor strategicplanningTransformingLisboninto the Atlanticcapital ofEurope LiaT.Vasconcelos&ArmindaC.Reis | 92    |
| 7Plan-making in the Zurich region HellmutRingli                                                                                  | 111   |
| 8Strategic development planning in western Norway Hordaland County and the City of Bergen ArildHolt-Jensen                       | 129   |
| 9 Rhetoric andreality inBritish structure planning inLancashire,1993-5 SiminDavoudi,PatsyHealey,AngelaHull                       | 146   |
| 10A plan with a purpose The regional plan for the province of Friesland,1994 BarrieNeedham                                       | 164   |
| 11 Working in a democratic culture Structure planning in Marks Kommun AbdulKhakee                                                | 181   |

| 12Community tocommunicationTheSchemaStrutturaleperla provincia di Grosseto,1990designing strategies AlessandroVignozzi   |   197 |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| 13 The institutional relations of plan-making AlainMotte                                                                 |   218 |
| 14Agenda-settinginEuropean spatial planning AbdulKhakee                                                                  |   238 |
| 15Planning strategies andplanningmethods BarrieNeedham                                                                   |   251 |
| 16Strategicplan-making andbuildinginstitutional capacity PatsyHealey,AbdulKhakee,AlainMotte,BarrieNeedham                |   264 |
| Index                                                                                                                    |   278 |

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thisbookhas beentheproduct of a collaborationnot onlybetween thevariousauthors whose work is in the book.It has also greatly benefited from the critical contributions of others who attended the workshops, and in particular, Andreas Faludi,Luigi Mazza, Alex Fubini,Pekka Virtanen,Hartmut Dieterich,Louis Albrechts,Tim Shaw and Dick Williams.Wewould alsolike to thank thosewho acted ashosts to ourworkshops at the University of Newcastle, the University of Nijmegen and the Catholic University of Leuven, and NIPOS (Nijmeegs Instituut von Planning en Ongeveingsstudies) and the Tyne and Wear Development Corporation for financial support. Our thanks to Bret Fleming for help with graphics, to Richard Newton for proof-reading the text, to Jill Connollyfor helpingwith organizing the seminars and managing the to-and-from process asweedited thechapters.ThanksalsotoSusanSmithandYasminIbrahimforefficient last-minute secretarial help. We have also appreciated the advice of Roger Jones, our publisher.

Individualauthorswouldalsolike tomakespecificacknowledgements.Michael Neuman thanks the Carfax Publishing Company for permission to reproduce Figures 5.1 and5.2from EuropeanPlanningStudies 4(3),pp.302and305.LiaVasconcelos and Arminda Reis thank RISCO for supplying the urban fringe model figure used in Figure 6.4.(from Camara Municipal de Lisboa (CML),1993b).

## CONTRIBUTORS

- Simin Davoudi has been researching in various aspects of planning systems and urban policy for many years. Her main interest is in policy processes in relation to strategic planmaking,environmentalsustainabilityandurbanregeneration.Herpublications include: Rebuilding the city (co-editor; Spon,1992),Managing cities (co-editor,John Wiley,1995) and severaljournal articles andbook chapters on development plans and urban regeneration. She is currently a lecturer in the Bartlett School of Planning, University College London,22 Gordon Street,London,WC1H 0QB.
- Patsy Healey has been researching in planning theory and planning practice for many years. She is particularly interested in the relation between communicative approaches in planning theory,the political economy of urbanregion dynamics and therelation with the policy processes and substantive contents of spatial planning practices. She haspublishedextensivelyontheseissues,includingLocalplansinBritishlanduse planning(Pergamon1983),Landuseplanningand themediationofurbanchange (with McNamara, Elson and Doak; Cambridge University Press, 1988), Managing cities (with Cameron, Davoudi, Graham and Madani Pour as co-editors; John Wiley, 1995), Negotiating development (with Purdue and Ennis; Spon, London 1995), and Collaborative planning: shaping places in fragmented societies (Macmillan 1997). SheiscurrentlydirectoroftheCentreforResearchinEuropeanUrbanEnvironments at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne,Newcastle NE1 7RU.
- Arild Holt-Jensen received his MA in geography in 1963 on a regional study of the mountain communeRaulandinTelemark,whichwasfurther elaborated to a high mountainrecreationalplan.Hereceivedhisdoctoratein1986onastudyoftheeffects ofcomprehensiveplanningonsettlement and populationdevelopment in17 municipalities in the Kristiansand area of Norway. He has published textbooks in geography and has worked on environmental planning and management of national parks and related reserves.He has actively participated in local politics for the Liberal Party as member of Bergen City Council and chairman of Landaas Township Council. He is currently Professor of Geography at the University of Bergen, with special responsibility for the courses in local and regional planning, Department of Geography,Breiviken 2,5035Bergen,Sandviken,Norway.
- AngelaHull hasbeen researching invarious aspects of regulatory systems and planning practitioner. She is particularly interested in the relation between government intervention, urban region institutional capacity and spatial impacts. Her recent published work includes articles and book chapters on strategic planning, institutional relations, information diffusion in regulatory systems, and renewable energy policies. She is currently a lecturer in theDepartment of Town and CountryPlanning at the UniversityofNewcastle,NewcastleuponTyne,NE17RU.

- Ib Jorgenson is Associate Professor in Planning and Society at Aalborg University. Department of Development andPlanning,9220Aalborg,Denmark.He is agraduate (magistrum artium) in cultural sociology from the University of Copenhagen and has, among other subjects, researched in public participation, community organization, the welfare state and the politics of planning in Denmark and the USA since 1970. Presently he is doing research on evolving effects and consequences of EU planning and regional politics in general and in Denmark in particular.
- AbdulKhakeereceivedhisPhDineconomicsfromtheUniversityof Goteborgin1969 and hisPhDingeographyfromUmeaUniversityin1983.Hehas taught at the GoteborgSchool of EconomicsandtheUniversitiesofStockholmandUmea.Hehas beenvisitingresearcher attheUniversityofDelaware,BariPolytechnic,the UniversityofLisbonand theUniversityofMelbourne.HeiscurrentlyProfessor of Urban Planning in the Department of Political Science,Umea University,Sweden. He is the author of several books andmanyjournal articles onplanningtheory and planning practice, development planning and cultural economics. He was awarded the President's Medal by the Operational Research Society (UK) in 1994.
- Finn Kjersdam is Professor of UrbanPlanning at Aalborg University. He has been a member of the Council of the Association of European Schools of Planning, the EuropeanCouncil of TownPlanners and theInternational Societyof City and Regional Planners,formanyyears.He is presentlyDean of Engineering and Sciences atAalborgUniversity,9220Aalborg,Denmark.
- AlainMotteisProfessorinUrbanPlanningandHead attheInstitutd'Amenagement Regional,Universite d'Aix-Marseille,13100Aix enProvence,France since 1992. (He wasProfessorandHeadoftheInstitutd'UrbanismedeGrenoblebetween1988and 1991).Hereceived hisDoctorat d'EtatinEconomicsin1977at theUniversityofAixMarseille.His research is centred on public policies in urban planning at metropolitan and national levels. His main recent publication is a book,for which he acts as editor, on French planning policies: Schema directeur et agglomeration project: the experimentation of new urban policies (1981-1994) (Paris: Juris Service editions, 1995).
- Barrie Needham has carried out research into the practice of local and regional planning andintopowers andinstrumentsforimplementingplans and planningpolicies.In connectionwith thelatter,hehasresearched into andpublishedwidely about land policy. Since 1978 he has lived and worked in the Netherlands, where much of his researchhasbeen oninterpretingDutchplanningfornon-Dutchspeakers.Heis currently Professor of Spatial Planning at the University of Nijmegen, PO Box 9208, 6500HK,Nijmegen,TheNetherlands.
- Michael Neuman received his PhD in city and regional planning from the University of California at Berkeley in 1996. He recently lived in Spain for two years, conducting research in Madrid and Barcelona.A planning theorist whohas practised as a planner in local, county and state governments in the USA,he also consults and publishes internationally on strategicplanning and consensus building.Hisrecent research is on city, metropolitan and state planning and politics. He has won many awards, including a Fulbright Fellowship and a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts. His current address is: Department of City and Regional Planning, Wurster Hall, University of California,Berkeley,CA 94720,USA.

- Jan Nielsen has been researching in various aspects of planning systems, urban policy, planning theory and planning practice for many years. He received his PhD in 1990 on a study titledStrategy or democracy in local planning in Denmark.He has published textbooks and journal articleswithin the field of planning theory and planningpractice in Denmark,and is currently,as an Associate Professor in the Department of Development and Planning, Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark, doing research invarious aspects of spatial planning in Europe.
- Arminda Reis, architect since 1977, works in a Municipal Department for Housing and Planning in Setubal. She has a masters degree in regional and urban planning and has been involvedin research concerning the management of informationfor planning at municipal level with GIS.Shewrote a book on Municipal geographic information systems (Edicoes Fim de Seculo, 1993). In 1995 she began her doctoral degree, researching the implementation of municipal geographic information systems, which focuses on the management of change in organizations.Her current address is Quinta deVanicelos.Lote 22°Dto,Setubal,Portugal.
- Hellmut Ringli graduated as an architect at the Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich and studied town andregional planning at the Graduate School of Ekistiks in Athens. After four years of consulting work in town planning with Doxiadis Associates in Greece and Ghana,in1967 hejoined theInstitute for Local,Regional and National Planning (ORL-Institute) at the ETH Zurich,Hoenggerberg,8093 Zurich,Switzerland. Since then, as a senior staff member,he hasbeen mainly involved in research, development and consulting projects at the national and cantonal level. From 1969 to 1973 he was project manager for the "Swiss national development advising the Federal Office of Spatial Planning on various activities.
- AlessandroVignozzi is anurban designer/plannerin private practice and collaborates as aPhDstudentwiththeDipartimentodiUrbanisticaePianificazionedelTerritorioat the Facolta di Architettura in Florence.His research is centred on innovation in planmaking and the aesthetic quality of the built environment. He wrote an essay on design control inItalian planningfor amonographic issue of the journalBuiltEnvironment, editedbyJohnPunter.Hislastwork is a book on the experience of aestheticcontrol in England andits theoretical andpracticalimplicationsfrom thepoint ofviewofItalian planning practice. His current address is Via dei Serragli 101, 50124 Firenze, Italy.
- LiaT.Vasconcelos lectures in theDepartment of Environmental Engineering,New University of Lisbon,Quinta da Torre,2825Monte de Caparica,Portugal.Her research has focused on the processes of the use of information,particularly in complex multi-actor issueswithin the context of environmental quality and growth management. She is also interested in the role played by technology in enhancing these processes.Her work has involved the study of participatory settings in the building up of institutions, namely through collaborative group processes development.

## PART I

## CHAPTER ONE The revival of strategic spatial

## planning in Europe

PatsyHealey

## Introduction

## Spatial planninginEurope

This book is about new directions in the practice of spatial planning in Europe in the 1980s and 1990s. Its focus is on how spatial strategies are made and translated into plans and projects for managing spatial change, development investment and environmental quality in urban regions. A strategic approach to land-use regulation and investment in urbanandregionalspatialdevelopmentwasdominantinmanyEuropeancountriesinthe 1960s. By the 1980s, the strategic impetus had lapsed in many places. Political and policy attention had tended to shift to the project:infrastructure investment projects,urban transformation projects,business parks and new settlements. By the late 1980s,however, and even more in the 1990s,a strategic approach to the organization ofurban and regional space had become more prevalent. These new efforts in strategic spatial planningdiffersignificantlyfromthosedeployedinthe1960sintheirprocessesand policy agendas.This book focuses on this evolution.

The experience discussed is that of western Europe, including most of the countries now in the European Union,as well as Norway and Switzerland.Despite the diversity between and within these countries, they share two qualities which provide an interesting context for the evolution of strategic spatial planning practices. First, there is a strong appreciation of regional diversity and historical-cultural traditions. Secondly, most evolvedsomeformofsocialdemocraticconsensusintheperiodfollowingtheSecond WorldWar,inwhichgovernment in some formplayed a major rolein economic and social policy and, commonly,in the urban development process (Esping-Anderson 1990). Current shifts in governance have undermined this consensus but still build on its institutional forms anddiscourses.

## Spatialplanningincontext

Spatialplanning isaboutsettingframeworks and principles toguidethelocation of development and physical infrastructure. It consists of a set of governance practices for developing and implementing strategies,plans,policies and projects, and for regulating the location, timing and form of development. These practices are shaped by the dynamics of economic and social change,whichgive rise to demands for space,location and qualities of places. These dynamics also shape expectations about how demands will

be met,and the values accorded to the attributes of places and buildings.The demands are mediated through local political systems and practices and by regional and national government politics and administration. Through these interactions, general economic and socialtendencies interrelate with local conditions and concerns to produce distinctive, contingent responses to the dynamics of urban region change. However, spatial planning practices are not just a contingent response to wider forces. They are also active forces in these changes. Investment decisions, principles for regulating land-use change, and ideas about spatial organization generate constraints and opportunities. These help to shape urban region dynamics.The objective of many of the spatial plan-making exercises discussed in thisbook is deliberately to"framethe dynamics ofurbanregion change by shaping the decisions of all the many agents whose activities constitute and carry these dynamics. In this way, government helps to structure both land and property development activity and the agendas of pressure groups and social movements concernedwith environmental quality.

This perspective on spatial planning reflects an "institutionalist"approach to social change and publicpolicy.We elaborate thisin Chapter 2.It leads us to considerhow contemporary spatial plan-making exercises contribute and respond to the changes in the economic, social and political trajectories of today's urban regions. How far are spatial planning practices adapting to these changes? To what extent are they loci of innovation in changingurbanregiongovernancepractices?What are thepotential consequences of such adaptation and innovation, in terms of the economic health, quality of life, social cohesion and environmental quality ofregions,and whatif there isno adaptation or innovation?What are the implications of current changes for the methods of planning and therolesofplanners?

## Theargument

The discussion and cases in this book are focused by the following premises. First, we anticipated that strategic spatial planning activity would be taking place in contexts very different to those of themid-twentieth century. These differences are discussed further in the next section. Three types of difference are of major significance for planning systems. First, the economic restructuring of many of Europe's urban regions towards new forms of production relations, and an expansion and diversification of the service sector, have generated pressures on urban regions. This leads local political communities to seek ways of developing and promoting their economies in proactive ways. Secondly,the combination offiscal stress in thepublic sector and theleverage ofneoliberalpolitical philosophy have led to new relationships between public and private sectors in the land and property development sector. Thirdly, the growing political influence of the environmentalmovement, and a whole range of other lobby groups,have focused significant political attention on the impacts ofprojects to changelocal environments. One question of the study was therefore to examine howEurope's planning systemswere responding to new contexts. Are the systems inherited from the past robust enough for present circumstances? Are they being transformed and,if so,into what institutional forms andwithwhat consequences?

A second premise relates to the nature of strategic plan-making.We understand this as a social process through which a range of people in diverse institutional relations and

5

positions come together to design plan-making processes and develop contents and strategies for the management of spatial change.This process generates notmerely formal outputs in terms of policy and project proposals, but a decision framework that may influence relevant parties in their future investment and regulatory activities. It may also generate ways of understanding,ways of building agreement, of organizing and of mobilizing to influence in political arenas. This social process, we assume,is shaped by boththedynamicsofurbanregionchangeandbytheformallawandprocedureof existing spatial and land-use planning systems. We also recognize that the effort of planmaking itself has the potential to be an active force in both the trajectory of urban region change and in the framing and realization of formal policy systems.Wewere,therefore, interested on the one hand in the interaction between the active work of "agency" in realizing and shaping structuring forces and, on the other, the "driving power" of these forces, with respect to the governance of the spatial organization of urban regions. This approach is developed further in Chapter 2.

A thirdpremisewas that thepolicyfieldof strategicspatial planning is of importance to political communities in many urban regions in contemporary Europe. The locational development and telecommunications infrastructures. Changes in economic organization and in life-styles are leading to new ways of using urban region space, devaluing some locations and revaluing others.Newunderstandings of environmentalimpacts and capacity constraints force reconsideration of the value of sites, locations and environmental assets. We therefore anticipated that spatial planning would attract significant political and policy attention.

Finally, we recognized that, within western Europe, spatial planning systems and practices have evolved in a distinctive historical,institutional and cultural context. One dimension of this context is a deepvaluing of the qualities of place and an appreciation of their diversity. More specifically with respect to spatial planning systems, there is a settled acceptance of the importance of individual property rights, combined with a recognitionthatitislegitimatefor governmentstolimittheserightsinthe collective interest.Thisacceptancehasbeenreinforced over theyearsbyapositiveviewofmany of the measures introduced in post-war welfare states (Esping-Anderson 1990). Although in most countries,spatialplanningis grounded at theregional orlocal level ofgovernment, there are alsolong-standingtraditions ofintervention at theurbanregion level,toprovide master plans and strategies for towns and cities.This means that formal procedures and institutional arenas for strategic spatial plan-making in the machinery of spatial and landuse planning systems have been in existence for many years and do not have to be invented de novo.In this context,we sought to explore how political communities in urban regions were expressing themselves in their spatial plans, what they identified as key actions to pursue in thepublicinterest andwhat institutionalprocesses and arenas theywereusingtoarticulatetheirconcerns.Specificallyinourstudy,wewereinterested in the way the rich inheritance of institutional resources for managing spatial change in urban regions embodied in formal planning systems was being used and redesigned to meetnewchallenges.

These issues are explored through ten case studies of spatial strategy-making. Each has been selected from within each country as representative of leading edge or innovatory practices in some respect (Healey 1994). To set the above issues in context,
