# Local First

Is a non-profit organization that leads the development of an economy grounded in local ownership that meets the basic needs of people,builds local wealth and social capital,functions in harmony with ourecosystem,and encourages joyful community.

# Local First support locally owned business

Local isn't a place,it is people.It's reintegrating our lives,connecting in practical ways with the people we live and work with.Local First is another way of saying"Peoplefirst."

Local isn't just a place on a map.It's people:your neighbors and their families, their businesses,farms,nonprofits,events and recreational venues.Local is a community and all ofthe opportunities we create together and challenges we work to overcome Local First has a passion for people living and working together in sustainable community

# When we say local, we mean

Locally Owned
Headquartered in West Michigan
Privately Held (not traded on the stock market)

# By eating locally.you will:

Support our farmers
Strengthen our local economy
Ensure that you receive high quality food
Cultivate community
Eat sustainably while increasing healthy options

# Why Local First?

1. Local First Engages.It creates and deepens relationships within a commmnity,which becomes more vibrant through collaboration and mutual investment
2. LocaFirst Humanizes.Physical and economic development occur on a scale that nurtures people and encourages beauty in nstral and manmade environments.
3. Loeal First Preserves.When more citizens are gennine stakeholders.protecting local economic an environmental valne is of mutual interest
4. Loca First Strengthens.When citizeng and loca businesses work together,it catalyzes positiv development and the community has structural integrity to withstand economic downtums
5. LocalFirst Inyests.Sustainable local economies an ecosystems row into manket thaat sre greater taan the sum of their parts.
6. Local First Emcourages.Intimate connection between customers and businesses facilitate innovation interaction, and discovery,making for a ore vibran amd resilient local economy.
7. Loeal First Emriches.Reinvesting success in customers, employees, and the local emvironment makes the entire community wealthier.

# Contact Us

(616) 808-3788 info@localfirst.com 955 Wealthy St. S. E. Grand Rapids, Ml 49506 Localfirst.com/eat-local

# Featured Business

Discover and shop at locally-owned entrepreneurial businesses that invest in their community through the Triple Bottom Line of people, planet and profit.

# HARMONY BREWING COMPANY

Harmony Brewing Company.located in Grand Rapidsat1551 LakeDrSe,offers rustic wood fired pizzas,with hand prepared dough and a unique twist. Goat cheese is used instead of cheese from.cow's milk providing more flavor with less fat and fewer calories. A great way to enjoy a pizza while still staying within a healthy diet!

Contact:616)233-0063

A Moveable Feastis a Grand Rapids based food truck serving delicious food made using only the highest quality ingredients,with an emphasis on local producers and responsible production methods

Contact:[616]401-8574

# Eat Locally Eat Nutritiously

# Recipes

## APPENDIXA.
