476

## CHAP.9 SOLUTION OF DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

Figure 9.11 Reduction of the step size to $ h/2 $ in an adaptive method.

The importance of the predictor-corrector method should now be evident. Formula (6) gives an approximate error estimate based on the two computed values $ {p}_{k + 1} $ and $ {y}_{k + 1} $ and does not use $ {y}^{\left( 5\right) }\left( t\right) $ .

# ## Practical Considerations

The corrector (3) used the approximation $ {f}_{k + 1} \approx f\left( {{t}_{k - 1},{p}_{k + 1}}\right) $ in the calculation of $ {y}_{k + 1} $ . Since $ {y}_{k + 1} $ is also an estimate for $ y\left( {t}_{k + 1}\right) $ , it could be used in the corrector (3) to generate a new approximation for $ {f}_{k + 1} $ , which in turn will generate a new value for $ {y}_{k + 1} $. However,when this iteration on the corrector is continued, it will converge to a fixed point of (3) rather than the differential equation. It is more efficient to reduce the step size if more accuracy is needed.

Formula (6) can be used to determine when to change the step size. Although elaborate methods are available, we show how to reduce the step size to $ h/2 $ or increase it to $ {2h} $ . Let $ \operatorname{RelErr} = 5 \times {10}^{6} $ be our relative error criterion, and let $ \operatorname{Small} = {10}^{5} $ .

$$
$$\text{If}\quad\frac{19}{270}\frac{|y_{k+1}\quad p_{k+1}|}{|y_{k+1}|+\mathrm{Small}}>\mathrm{RelErr},\quad\text{then set}\;h=\frac{h}{2}. \tag{7}$$
$$

$$
$$\text{If}\quad\frac{19}{270}\frac{\left| {y}_{k + 1}\quad{p}_{k + 1}\right| }{\left| {y}_{k + 1}\right|  + \text{ Small }} < \frac{\text{ RelErr }}{100},~~\text{then set}\; h = {2h}\text{.}\tag{8}$$
$$

When the predicted and corrected values do not agree to five significant digits, then (7) reduces the step size. If they agree to seven or more significant digits, then (8) increases the step size. Fine-tuning of these parameters should be made to suit your particular computer.

Reducing the step size required four new starting values. Interpolation of $ f\left( {t,y\left( t\right) }\right) $ with a fourth-degree polynomial is used to supply the missing values that bisect the intervals $ \left\lbrack {{t}_{k \; 2},{t}_{k \; 1}}\right\rbrack $ and $ \left\lbrack {{t}_{k \; 1},{t}_{k}}\right\rbrack $ . The four mesh points $ {t}_{k\; 3/2},{t}_{k \; 1},{t}_{k \; 1/2} $, and $ {t}_{k} $ used in the successive calculations are shown in Figure 9.11.

The interpolation formulas needed to obtain the new starting values for the step size $ h/2 $ are

$$
$${f}_{k\;1/2} = \frac{5{f}_{k\;4} + {28}{f}_{k\;3}\quad{70}{f}_{k\;2} + {140}{f}_{k\;1} + {35}{f}_{k}}{128},\tag{9}$$
$$

$$
$$f_{k\;3/2}=\frac{3f_{k\;4}\quad20f_{k\;3}+90f_{k\;2}+60f_{k\;1}\quad5f_{k}}{128}.$$
$$

Increasing the step size is an easier task. Seven prior points are needed to double the step size. The four new points are obtained by omitting every second one, as shown in Figure 9.12.
