<table><tr><td colspan="2" rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Sym</td><td colspan="2">Asym</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Key generation</td><td>Encryption</td><td>Key generation</td><td>Encryption</td><td>KDF</td><td>Digital sig.</td><td>X.509</td><td>Usability claims</td><td>Downloads</td></tr><tr><td>PyCrypto</td><td>[42]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>25149446</td></tr><tr><td><a href="http://cryptography.io" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">cryptography.io</a></td><td>[8]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>10481277</td></tr><tr><td>M2Crypto</td><td>[43]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>2369827</td></tr><tr><td>Keyczar</td><td>[44]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>595277</td></tr><tr><td>PyNaCl</td><td>[45]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>46013</td></tr><tr><td>pyOpenSSL</td><td>[46]</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>10188101</td></tr><tr><td>tlslite</td><td>[47]</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>641488</td></tr><tr><td>bcrypt</td><td>[48]</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>536851</td></tr><tr><td>gnupg</td><td>[49]</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>189851</td></tr><tr><td>pycryptopp</td><td>[50]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>140703</td></tr><tr><td>scrypt</td><td>[51]</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>140446</td></tr><tr><td>simple-crypt</td><td>[52]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>112254</td></tr><tr><td>pysodium</td><td>[53]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>49275</td></tr><tr><td>ed25519</td><td>[54]</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>29670</td></tr><tr><td>pyaes</td><td>[55]</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>19091</td></tr><tr><td>PyCryptodome</td><td>[56]</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>16960</td></tr><tr><td>PyMe</td><td>[57]</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>2489</td></tr><tr><td>pyDes</td><td>[58]</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>$?^{\dagger}$</td></tr><tr><td>tls</td><td>[59]</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>○</td><td>●</td><td>$?^{\dagger}$</td></tr></table>

● = applies; ○ = does not apply

TABLE I Cryptography-related Python libraries and their features,ordered by popularity.The top section includes the libraries we tested. Download counts as of May 2O16 were taken from the PyPI ranking website (http://pypi-ranking.info).$^{\dagger}$No download statistics available.

PyCrypto, gnupg for its limited support for encryption (mainly in the context of email), pycryptopp as it was deprecated as of January 2016, and simple-crypt as it does not support asymmetric cryptography.

In tables and figures throughout the paper,we order the libraries as follows: PyCrypto first as the most popular, then M2Crypto as the other library without usability claims, then the three libraries with usability claims.

# ### C. Recruitment and framing

To maintain ecological validity, we wanted to recruit de-velopers who actively use Python. To find such developers,we conducted a systematic analysis of Python contributors on the popular GitHub collaborative source code management service.

We extracted all Python projects from the GitHub Archive database [60] between GitHub's launch in April 2008 and February 2016, giving us 749609 projects in total. We ran-domly sampled 100000 of these repositories and cloned them.Using this random sample, we extracted email addresses of 50 000 randomly chosen Python committers. These committers served as a source pool for our recruiting.

We emailed these developers in batches, asking them to participate in a study exploring how developers use Python libraries. We did not mention cryptography or security in the recruitment message. We mentioned that we would not be able to compensate them, but the email offered a link to learn more about the study and a link to remove the email address from any further communication about our research. Each contacted developer was assigned a unique pseudonymous identifier (ID) to allow us to correlate their study participation to their GitHub statistics separately from theiremail address.

Recipients who clicked the link to participate in the study were directed to a landing page containing a consent form.After affirming they were over 18, consented to the study, and were comfortable with participating in the study in English,they were introduced to the study framing. We asked participants to imagine they were developing code for an app called CitizenMeasure,“anew global monitoring system that will allow citizen-scientists to travel to remote locations and make measurements about such issues as water pollution, deforesta-tion,child labor, and human trafficking. Please keep in mind that our citizen-scientists may be operating in locations that are potentially dangerous, collecting information that powerful interests want kept secret. Our citizen scientists may have their devices confiscated and hacked.” We hoped that this framing would pique participants' interest and motivate them to make a strong effort to write secure code. We also provided brief instructions for using the study infrastructure, which we describe next.

# ### D. Experimental infrastructure

After reading the study introduction and framing, partici-pants were redirected to the tasks themselves. Our aim was to conduct an online developer study in which real developers would write and test real cryptographic code in our environment. We wanted to capture the code that they typed and their program runs. We wanted to control the study environment (Python version, available libraries) and collect data about their progress in real time. To achieve this, we used Jupyter Notebook [61], which allowed participants to write and run Python code in their browser, using the Python installation from our server. We instrumented the notebook to frequently snapshot the participant's code, as well as to detect and store copy&paste events. All this information was stored on the server.

We configured Notebook (version 4.2.1) with Python 2.7.11 and all five tested cryptographic libraries. To prevent interference between participants, each participant was assigned to a Notebook running on a separate Amazon Web Service (AWS) instance. We maintained a pool of prepared instances so that each new participant could begin without waiting for an instance to boot. Instances were shut down when each participant finished, to avoid between-subjects contamination.

Tasks were shown one at a time, with a progress indicator showing that the participant had completed, e.g.,1 of 3 tasks.For each task, participants were given buttons to “Run and test” their code, and to move on using “Solved, next task”

157

Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on March 02, 2025 at 19:07:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
