106

## PLATFORMS

combine the business dimension with the technical one at the large scale of permanent change and modularity. Whereas application domains like digital humanitarians are beginning to follow microservices, the Airbnb platform already deploys 3,500 microservices per week, with a total of 75,000 production deploys per year. Airbnb now has what it calls 'democratic deploys', which means that 'all developers are expected [to] own their own [microservice] features from implementation to production. $ {}^{\prime {72}} $

Although microservices seem like a new concept, they continue many of the existing mundane platform practices we have already encountered. APIs and PaaS come into their own within the concept of microservices. Microservices are the building blocks by which a PaaS is exposed to the outside world while maintaining control at the core. APIs allow them to connect with each other and collaborate. $ {}^{73} $ This flexibility has aided the grand emergence of microservices across platforms. Airbnb, Amazon, eBay, etc. have all become microservice-based architectures, and Netflix is scaling to billions of requests for content every day. As Netflix explains on the company's technology blog, their 'API is the front door to the Netflix ecosystem of microservices.... So, at its core, the Netflix API is an orchestration service that exposes coarse grained APIs by composing fine-grained functionality provided by the microservices. $ ^{\prime 74} $

The scale and speed of platforms built around microservices make full human control impossible. At any moment in time, Airbnb's algorithms enable and make decisions about which microservices are deployed and constitute the Airbnb platform. The platform becomes a socio-technical self-composing system run by machines for machines, which also organizes the required input from human developers and microworkers. Platforms are so dispersed and heterogeneous that only machine learning can bring them together again. Machines learn to complete the tasks necessary to keep platform insides and outsides together. They have become part of the workflows of digital production as permanent interpretation engines of our likes and dislikes or which disaster to react to next.

Thus, digital platforms have evolved into infrastructures that allow for the permanent recomposition of their component services and devices that they themselves permanently compose and decompose. The big platforms have already perfected this movement and smaller ones like humanitarian platforms have begun to follow. Operating through microservices, platform power

$ {}^{72} $ Currie,'Airbnb's 10 Takeaways from Moving to Microservices'.

$^{73}$ Newman,Building Microservices.

$ {}^{74} $ Netflix,’Netflix API Re-Architecture’.

## Downloaded from https://cademic.oup.com/book/43085 by University of Amsterdam user on 04 July 2024
