## The Burning Wheel

# ## Helmets and Headgear

Helmets and headgear are described separately from the main armor types so you can combine different types of armor.

<table><tr><td>Skull cap or leather hood</td><td>1D</td></tr><tr><td>Light helmet, Pot helm</td><td>2D</td></tr><tr><td>Spangenhelm</td><td>3D</td></tr><tr><td>Open-faced Bascinet, Barbute</td><td>4D</td></tr><tr><td>Sallet, Closed Bascinet</td><td>5D</td></tr><tr><td>Great helm</td><td>6D</td></tr></table>

# # Armor Test Obstacles

Armor dice act like any other ability in Burning Wheel. Players test the appropriate number of dice and attempt to get successes equal to the obstacle.

The base obstacle for all armor tests is 1. As long as the obstacle is met, the blow is warded off completely.

A character wearing a reinforced leather helmet who is punched in the head, would roll 2D versus Ob 1.

# ## Armor Difficulty Number and Shade

Armor obeys the rules for shade just like any other ability. Therefore, mundane (black shade) armor is difficulty number 4, gray shade armor is 3, and white shade is 2. All armor is mundane unless explicitly stated otherwise. Heroic and supernatural shade armors are extremely hard to come by.

# # Weapons Versus Armor

Weapons are listed with a Versus Armor (VA) rating. This describes the weapon's ability to penetrate, crush or bypass armor. The number indicates the obstacle penalty for any armor test caused by that weapon.

An axe has a VA 1, so any armor tests made against it are at +10b. Therefore, if a player's character is hit on the arm by an axe, he needs to roll two successes on his armor in order to ward off the blow. (Ob 1 + VA 1 = Ob 2.) If he fails, the blow penetrates and the character is injured.

A knife has a VA -. It does not raise armor test obstacles at all. All armor tests against a knife are Ob 1.

476

Edward Ze (Order #44483214)
