## Figure 5.3a

## With its lifestyle insinuation,the name Nautica helps to shape the brand's sporty identity. (Frazer Harrison/Getty Images for IMG)

## Figure 5.3b

## Massimo Dutti doubles up on associations, using a brand name that implies the existence of a specific designer (as opposed to a nameless team) as well as one of Italian heritage.

( ©char abumansoor / Alamy)

- Licensing is also a more common mode for global expansion in this segment.

- Franchising is a common distribution strategy, especially as a mode of entry into foreign markets. (See Figure 5,4.) On the other hand,many luxury brands prefer full store ownerships whenever possible.

- Mass-market brands rely heavily on outsourcingfor cheaper material and factors of production.Over 60 percent of the world's apparelproduction is exported from developingcountries where cheap labor and low costs ofproduction prevail. On the other hand, manyluxury brands still manufacture in workshops orfactories located in European fashion capitals.

- Mass-market brands are prone to productadaptations or localization in foreign marketsin terms of design, sizing, and marketing. Somelevel of adaptation can be acceptable for luxurybrands, although they are largely built on theuniversality of their image and products

- Being cost and price inelastic, mass-market brands face a major pricing challenge as they enter different markets. Transportation costs, taxes, and standards of living may force the brand to change pricing strategies in different markets, causing the brand to be positioned and segmented in a different way. Zara's price in Europe, the United States, or Japan differs greatly from in Spain, where Zara fashions are produced.

- The luxury customer is in general more globally homogeneous than the mass-market customer. Being mainly lifestyle brands, luxury brands represent common values and cultures that are appreciated by their customers everywhere. Many mass-market brands, on the other hand,
