## Virtual classes, real sets

2. David Makinson, Sets, Logic and Maths for Computing (Springer, 3rd edn 2020), Chapters 1 to 3.

Chapter 1 reviews basic facts about sets. Chapter 2 is on relations. Chapter 3 is on functions. This too can be warmly recommended - though you might want to supplement it by following up the reference to Cantor's Theorem. But the stand-out recommendation for those who need it is:

But the stand-out recommendation for those who need it is:

3. Tim Button, Set Theory: An Open Introduction (Open Logic Project), Chapters 1-5. Available at tinyurl.com/opensettheory.

Read Chapter 1 for some interesting background. Chapter 2 introduces basic notions like subsets, powersets, unions, intersections, pairs, tuples, Cartesian products. Chapter 3 is on relations (treated as sets). Chapter 4 is on functions. Chapter 5 is on the size of sets, countable vs uncountable sets, Cantor's Theorem.

At this stage in his book, Button is proceeding naively in our second sense, with the promise that everything he does can be replicated in the rigorously axiomatized theory he introduces later.

Button writes, here as elsewhere, with very admirable clarity. So this is very warmly recommended.

Note, Makinson doesn't mention the Axiom of Choice at all. And while Button does eventually get round to Choice in his Chapter 16, the treatment there depends on the set theory developed in the intervening chapters, so isn't appropriate for us just now. Instead, the following two pages should be enough for the present:

4. Timothy Gowers et al. eds, The Princeton Companion to Mathematics (Princeton UP, 2008), §III.1: The Axiom of Choice.

# ### 2.4 Virtual classes, real sets

An afterword. According to Cantor, a set is a unity, a single thing in itself over and above its members. But if that is the guiding idea, then it is worth noting that a good deal of elementary set talk in mathematics can in effect be treated as just a handy façon de parler. Yes, it is a useful and familiar idiom for talking about many things at once; but in elementary contexts apparent talk of a set of $ X\mathrm{\;s} $ is often not really intended to carry any serious commitment to there being any additional object,a set,over and above those $ X $ s. On the contrary,in such contexts,apparent talk about a set of $ {Fs} $ can very often be paraphrased away into more direct talk about those $ F s$  themselves,without any loss of content.

Here is just one example from elementary logic. It is usual to say something like this: (1) "A set of formulas $ \Gamma $ logically entails the formula $ A $ if and only if any valuation which makes every member of $\Gamma$ true makes $A$ true too". Don’t

11
