Assume that $ \mathcal{M} $ halts. Let $ N $ be the number of time steps it takes $\mathcal{M}$ to halt. For every $ n \geq N $ , by Corollary 2.60, $ {\mathcal{V}}_{n}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda } $ has a perfect ZPC strategy. So, if $ C \geq N $ , then we are done. Otherwise, let $ n $ be such that

$$
$$\max \left( {C,\log N}\right)  \leq  n < N.$$
$$

By Lemma 2.59, $ {\mathcal{V}}_{n}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda } = {\left( {\mathcal{V}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda }\right) }_{n}^{\prime } $ in this case. By the compression theorem 2.53, since $ n \geq C,{( {\mathcal{V}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda }) }_{n}^{\prime } $ has a perfect ZPC strategy given that $ {\mathcal{V}}_{{2}^{n}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda } $ has one. But $ {2}^{n} \geq N $ , and we already argued that these tailored games have perfect ZPC strategies. Hence, $ {\mathcal{V}}_{n}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda } $ has a perfect ZPC strategy when $ n \geq \max \left( {C,\log N}\right) $ . If $ C \geq \log N $ , then we are done. Otherwise, we can iterate this argument and deduce the same for any $ n \geq \max \left( {C,\log \log N}\right) $ . Since there exists some $ t $ for which $C \geq \underbrace{\log \ldots \log}_{t\text{-times}} N$ , we deduce that $ {\mathfrak{G}}_{\mathcal{M}} = {\mathcal{V}}_{C}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda } $ has a perfect ZPC strategy. This proves (2) in Theorem 2.31.

Assume that $ \mathcal{M} $ does not halt. Then,by Lemma 2.59,

$$
$${\mathcal{V}}_{n}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda } = {( {\mathcal{V}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda }) }_{n}^{\prime } \tag{11}$$
$$

for every $ n $ . If $ n \geq C $ , then by the compression theorem 2.53, we have

$$
$$\mathscr{E}( {{( {\mathcal{V}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda }) }_{n}^{\prime },1/2})  \geq  \mathscr{E}( {{\mathcal{V}}_{{2}^{n}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda },1/2}) \;\text{ and }\;\mathscr{E}( {{( {\mathcal{V}}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda }) }_{n}^{\prime },1/2})  \geq  \underset{ \geq  {2}^{n}}{\underbrace{{2}^{{2}^{\lambda n} - 1}}}. \tag{12}$$
$$

So, for every positive integer $ t $ we can deduce that

Since this was true for every $ t $ , we can deduce that $ \mathscr{E}( {{\mathcal{V}}_{C}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda },1/2}) = \infty $ , which in turn proves that

$$
$${\operatorname{val}}^{ * }\left( {\mathfrak{G}}_{\mathcal{M}}\right)  = {\operatorname{val}}^{ * }\left( {\mathcal{V}}_{C}^{\mathcal{M},\lambda }\right)  < 1/2,$$
$$

proving (3) in Theorem 2.31.

The rest of the paper is devoted to the proof of Compression, Theorem 2.53.

33
