## Starting the lesson

33

Table 3.2 Storage strategies

<table><tr><td>Strategy</td><td>Impact</td></tr><tr><td>Use a revision task to create a bridge between prior learning and new learning.</td><td>This allows learners to make connections and build on prior knowledge - it also gives the impression that new learning is familiar.</td></tr><tr><td>Use graphic organisers, flow charts or concept maps to present information.</td><td>This helps students to visualise how the new information connects to what they already know.</td></tr><tr><td>Keep presentation succinct.</td><td>This limits interference from unnecessary information and limits distractions.</td></tr><tr><td>Use worked examples to teach specific steps in a process.</td><td>This provides a framework for the new learning.</td></tr><tr><td>Present verbal and visual information together.</td><td>The additional ‘clues’ make the information easier to process.</td></tr><tr><td>Use visualisation techniques to encourage learners to see what they have learnt.</td><td>This helps learners to personalise the information to their own preferences.</td></tr><tr><td>Get learners to create revision materials such as quizzes, videos or podcasts.</td><td>This gives learners an opportunity to consolidate their own learning through synthesis.</td></tr></table>

By chunking sections of learning we are providing the opportunity to make the learning more memorable. This is done in two key ways - the first is by managing the amount of information presented and the second is finding an easy way to group it together. A typical example of this would be the use of a mnemonic. Most of you will remember the colours of the rainbow, not because you visualised and committed the colours to memory but because you learnt the mnemonic Richard Of York Gave Battle In Vain (or, if you are American, the name Roy G. Biv). A small chunk of information presented in a memorable and meaningful format is much easier to remember than Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, Violet. To translate this to your teaching practice, there are a few principles to remember:

- Information is easier to digest when it is broken into small,organised units.

- Information is easier to understand when the level of detail is correct.This means, appropriate for your audience.

- Information should be limited to a manageable amount-Miller's magic seven principle might provide a useful guide for the number of items in each unit.

When content is presented in smaller chunks it is not only easier to digest it is easier to assess. By breaking down content in this way you create the opportunity to put in place learning checks which in turn will provide you with evidence about how effectively the new information has been absorbed and inform your future planning. It is an effective feedback loop which helps both teachers and students.
