## The Burning Wheel

# ## Extreme Range (0b 3)

Each weapon has an extreme range at which missiles start to lose power and thus become inaccurate. Extreme range for a weapon is always one step closer than being out of range. Shots at extreme range are base Ob 3.

# ## Optimal Range (0b 2)

Without benefit of sighting mechanisms or precision mechanical devices, archers, crossbowmen and fusilliers are forced to rely on their own eyesight, depth perception, good judgment and the power of their weapon. Your target is easiest to hit when you're in optimal range. Shots from optimal range are base Ob 2.

# ## Too Close to Shoot

If you are at optimal range and you close with your opponent, you are too close to shoot-now you're in a melee. Range and Cover is over. Same goes for your opponent: If he is in optimal range for his weapon and he closes in with you, he's drawn you into a fight.

Once a fight moves into the too close to shoot range, Range and Cover volleys end and players switch to melee using the Fight rules.

# ## Max Range

All missile weapons have a maximum range listed in paces to help give players a sense of their effectiveness and to allow GMs to better narrate space and distance in the game.

# # Cover

Terrain, cover and shields raise your obstacle to shoot your opponent. They don't interfere with maneuvering per se. The GM sets the terrain and cover when he sets up the Range and Cover conflict unless the players use skill tests like Fortifications or wises to make or find cover.

# ## Cover Obstacle Penalties

- Trees, wall, barricade, hedge: +1 Ob

- Fortification, forest, or other dense cover: +2 Ob

- Shields: +1 Ob (see also Shields vs Missiles in the Armor and Shields chapter)

406

Edward Ze(Order #44483214)
