## Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-23) Sister Conferences Best Papers Track

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>postE</td><td>Learned Invariant</td></tr><tr><td>Bin1</td><td>$n$</td><td>$x + \left\lbrack {n < M}\right\rbrack \cdot \left( {M \cdot p - n \cdot p}\right) $</td></tr><tr><td>Fair</td><td>$count$</td><td>$(count + [{c1} + {c2} = = 0 ]\cdot( {p1} + {p2}) / ( {p1} + {p2} - {p1} \cdot {p2}))$</td></tr><tr><td>Gambler</td><td>$ z $</td><td>$z + \left\lbrack {x >0\text{ and }y >x}\right\rbrack \cdot x \cdot \left( {y - x}\right) $</td></tr><tr><td>Geo0</td><td>$ z $</td><td>$z + \left\lbrack {{flip} = = 0}\right\rbrack \cdot \left( {1 - {p}_{1}}\right) /{p}_{1} $</td></tr><tr><td>Sum0</td><td>$x $</td><td>$x + \left\lbrack {n >0}\right\rbrack \cdot \left( {{0.5} \cdot p \cdot {n}^{2} + {0.5} \cdot p \cdot n}\right) $</td></tr></table>

Table 1: Exact Invariants generated by EXIST

Data Augmentation. If inv violates any inequalities, EXIST produces a set of counterexample program states that are added to the set of initial states. To ensure that the generated counterexamples are effective data-points, EXIST looks for program states that maximize inv's violation of required inequalities. EXIST then adds states in counterexamples to states and augments the existing data with new data points generated on these counterexample states. The data augmentation process ensures that the synthesis algorithm collects more and more initial states, some randomly generated (sampleStates) and some from prior counterexamples, guiding the learner towards better candidates.

EXIST repeats the CEGIS loop by re-learning new models on the augmented dataset. Like most of the other CEGIS-based tools, our method is sound but not complete, i.e., if the algorithm returns an expectation then it is guaranteed to be an exact invariant or sub-invariant, but the algorithm might never return an answer; in practice, we set a timeout to force the procedure to terminate.

# ## 5 Evaluations

We implemented our prototype in Python, using sklearn and tensorflow to fit model trees and neural model trees, and Wolfram Alpha to verify and perform counterexample generation. We have evaluated our tool on a set of 18 benchmarks drawn from different sources in prior work [Gretz et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2015; Kaminski and Katoen, 2017]. We summarize our findings as follows:

- EXIST successfully synthesized and verified exact invariants for $ \frac{14}{18} $ benchmarks within a timeout of 300 seconds. Our tool was able to generate these 14 invariants in reasonable time,taking between 1 to 237 seconds. The sampling phase dominates the time in most cases. We also compare EXIST with a tool from prior literature, MORA [Bartocci et al., 2020]. We found that MORA can only handle a restrictive set of programs and cannot handle many of our benchmarks. We also discuss how our work compares with a few others in (Section 6).

- To evaluate sub-invariant learning, we created multiple problem instances for each benchmark by supplying different pre-expectations. On a total of 34 such problem instances, EXIST was able to infer correct invariants in 27 cases, taking between 7 to 102 seconds.

Table 1 and Table 2 contain some of the exact invariants and sub invariants generated by EXIST.

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>postE</td><td>preE</td><td>Learned Sub-invariant</td></tr><tr><td>Gambler</td><td>$z $</td><td>$ x \cdot \left( {y - x}\right) $</td><td>$z + [x >0\text{~and~} y >x] \cdot x \cdot (y - x) $</td></tr><tr><td>Geo0</td><td>$ z $</td><td>$[{flip} = = ]0 \cdot ( 1-p_{1})) $</td><td>$z+[{flip} = = 0 \cdot ( 1-p_{1})$</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">LinExp</td><td rowspan="2">$ z $</td><td rowspan="2">$ z + \left\lbrack {n >0}\right\rbrack \cdot 2 $$ z + \left\lbrack {n >0}\right\rbrack \cdot 2 \cdot n $</td><td rowspan="2">$ \left\lbrack {n >0}\right\rbrack \cdot \left( {n + 1}\right) $$ z + \left\lbrack {n >0}\right\rbrack \cdot 2 \cdot n $</td></tr><tr></tr><tr><td>RevBin</td><td>$ z $</td><td>$ z + \left\lbrack {x >0}\right\rbrack \cdot x\\z $</td><td>$ z + \left\lbrack {x >0}\right\rbrack \cdot x/p\\z$</td></tr></table>

Table 2: Sub-invariants generated by EXIST

# ## 6 Related Work

Invariant Generation for Probabilistic Programs. The PRINSYS system [Gretz et al., 2013] employs a template-based approach to guide the search for probabilistic invariants. [Chen et al., 2015] proposed a counterexample-guided approach to find polynomial invariants, by applying Lagrange interpolation. Unlike PRINSYS, this approach does not need templates; however, invariants involving guard expressions—common in our examples—cannot be found, since they are not polynomials. Additionally, [Chen et al., 2015] uses a weaker notion of invariant, which only needs to be correct on certain initial states; our tool generates invariants that are correct on all initial states. [Feng et al., 2017] improves on [Chen et al., 2015] by using Stengle's Positivstellensatz to encode invariants constraints as a semidefinite programming problem. However, their approach cannot synthesize piecewise linear invariants.

Another line of work applies martingales to derive insights of probabilistic programs. [Chakarov and Sankaranarayanan, 2013] showed several applications of martingales in program analysis, and [Barthe et al., 2016] gave a procedure to generate candidate martingales for a probabilistic program; however, this tool gives no control over which expected value is analyzed — the user can only guess initial expressions and the tool generates valid bounds, which may not be interesting.

Data-driven Invariant Synthesis. We are not aware of other data-driven methods for learning probabilistic invariants, but a recent work [Abate et al., 2021] proves probabilistic termination by learning ranking supermartingales encoded as two-layer neural networks from trace data.

Data-driven inference of invariants for deterministic programs has been an area of interest, starting from DAIKON [Ernst et al., 2007]. For inductive invariants, ICE learning [Garg et al., 2016] uses a modified decision tree learning algorithm and HANOI [Miltner et al., 2020] uses a CEGIS-based engine that alternates between weakening and strengthening candidates. Recent work uses neural networks to learn invariants [Si et al., 2018]. Data from fuzzing has been used for almost correct inductive invariants [Lahiri and Roy, 2022] for programs with closed-box operations. As a data-driven learning task, invariant inference for deterministic programs can be treated as a classification problem while that for probabilistic programs becomes a regression task.

6418
