Fermat Calabi-Yaus have much larger symmetries inherited from the embedding in $ {\mathbb{P}}^{n} $ . This stands to significantly speed up machine learning approaches in highly symmetric situations. In contrast, the neural network and GNN approaches are more useful in less symmetric contexts, such as the Dwork family, where we do not find additional symmetries.

# ## 3.2 Salience of Symmetric Features

To estimate the impact of different features on the loss, we train a model that uses many features with different symmetry groups. We use spectral features of Berglund et al. [37], as well as other more symmetric (0,0)-forms, and then compare their saliencies $ {a}_{i} $ defined in Eq. (2.7). The most symmetric expressions we look at are the power sum *symmetric polynomials*

$$
$${s}_{k} = \frac{\mathop{\sum }\limits_{i}{\left| {Z}_{i}\right| }^{2k}}{{( \mathop{\sum }\limits_{i}{\left| {Z}_{i}\right| }^{2}) }^{k}} \tag{3.1}$$
$$

which we normalise to ensure they are degree 0 homogeneous. These are real polynomials, so they do not form a basis for symmetric functions of type $ {\mathbb{P}}^{n} \rightarrow \mathbb{R} $ . But, they do form a basis on $ {\mathbb{{RP}}}^{n} $, where we only need to use $ {s}_{2},\ldots ,{s}_{n + 1} $ because we always have $ {s}_{0} = n $ and $ {s}_{1} = 1 $.

Figure 4. Computation graph of attribution weights, with arrows denoting dependencies. Left: differentiation with respect to features is impossible as it overlaps with an earlier one. Right: correct implementation with both differentiations in feature space.

The saliencies $ {a}_{i} $ cannot be computed in the PhiModel, as $ g $ and $ {\mathcal{L}}_{\sigma } $ are obtained by differentiating with respect to coordinates $ {Z}_{i} $ , while features $ x = f\left( {z,\bar{z}}\right) $ are in the middle of the computation graph and so are unavailable for differentiation. In order to compute them, we modify the PhiModel of Eq. (2.4) and replace differentiation $ \partial \phi /\partial z $ in ambient space with differentiation $ \partial \phi /\partial x $ in feature space via the chain rule in Appendix E. This approach is visualised in Fig. 4, and the resulting ansatz for the metric becomes

$$
$$g = {\iota }^{ * }\left( {{g}_{\mathrm{{FS}}} + \frac{\partial \phi }{\partial {x}_{k}}\frac{{\partial }^{2}{x}_{k}}{\partial {z}_{i}\partial \overline{{z}_{j}}} + \frac{{\partial }^{2}\phi }{\partial {x}_{k}\partial {x}_{l}}\frac{\partial {x}_{k}}{\partial {z}_{i}}\frac{\partial x_{l}}{\partial \overline{{z}_{j}}}}\right)  \tag{3.2}$$
$$

where $ \phi : {\mathbb{R}}^{m} \rightarrow \mathbb{R} $ is now a function of real features $ x\left( {z,\bar{z}}\right) $ , and $ x : {\mathbb{P}}^{n} \rightarrow {\mathbb{R}}^{m} $ . Unlike Eq. (2.4),this expression can be differentiated with respect to $ x $, because we can treat $ \partial x/\partial z $ terms as constants, and only differentiate the $ \partial \phi /\partial x $ terms. This also means that

-10-
