You may recall that in Chapter 1 I asked you to compose a list of questions that you would like to have answered by the end of Psychology and Life. Students who have used the book in the past responded to this request with a range of interesting concerns. Here are some of their questions:

- Should I use my cell phone while I drive?

- Can memory research help me study for exams?

- How can I become more creative?

- Is it okay to put kids in day care?

In this chapter, we consider how psychologists generate answers to questions that matter most to students. The focus will be on the special way in which psychology applies the scientific method to its domain of inquiry. By the end of the chapter, you should understand how psychologists design their research: How can solid conclusions ever be drawn from the complex and often fuzzy phenomena that psychologists study-how people think, feel, and behave? Even if you never do any scientific research in your life, mastering the information in this section will be useful. The underlying purpose here is to help improve your critical thinking skills by teaching you how to ask the right questions and evaluate the answers about the causes, consequences, and correlates of psychological phenomena. The mass media constantly release stories that begin with, "Research shows that...." By sharpening your intelligent skepticism, this chapter will help you become a more sophisticated consumer of the re

search-based conclusions that confront you in everyday life.

# ## THE PROCESS OF RESEARCH

The research process in psychology can be divided into several steps that usually occur in sequence (see Figure 2.1). The process typically begins with Step 1, in which observations, beliefs, information, and general knowledge lead someone to come up with a new idea or a different way of thinking about a phenomenon. Where do researchers' questions originate? Some come from direct observations of events, humans, and nonhumans in the environment. Other research addresses traditional parts of the field: Some issues are considered to be "great unanswered questions" that have been passed down from earlier scholars. Researchers often combine old ideas in unique ways that offer an original perspective. The hallmark of the truly creative thinker is the discovery of a new truth that moves science and society in a better direction.

As psychologists accumulate information about phenomena, they create theories that become an important context to formulate research questions. A theory is an organized set of concepts that explains a phenomenon or set of phenomena. At the common core of most psychological theories is the assumption of determinism, the idea that all events-physical, mental,

Watch the Video The Big Picture: How to Answer Psychological Questions? on MyPsychLab

**theory** An organized set of concepts that explains a phenomenon or set of phenomena.

determinism The doctrine that all events-physical, behavioral, and mental-are determined by specific causal factors that are potentially knowable.

# Step 1

# Initial observation or question

Similarity plays a large role in relationships, as does conversation. Perhaps conversation provides a context for couples to gauge similarity.

# Step 2

# Form a hypothesis

Couples whose style of language use is more similar will show more stability in their relationships.

# Step 3

# Design the study

Couples' instant messages for a 10-day period were assessed on a variety of linguistic features yielding an index of language style matching.

Three months later, couples indicated whether they were still dating.

# Step 4

# Analyze the data and draw conclusions

The data revealed that couples with more language style matching were more likely to still be dating.

# Step 5

# Report the findings

The article appeared in the prestigious journal Psychological Science.

# Step 6

# Consider open questions

The discussion in the article acknowledges that the direction of the effect remains open: More language style matching might lead to better relationships or might lead to more language style matching.

# Step 7

# Act on open questions

These or other researchers can undertake new research to answer the open questions.

# FIGURE 2.1 Steps in the Process of Conducting and Reporting Research

To illustrate the steps in the scientific process, consider a study that examined the relationship between couples' language styles and the stability of their relationships (Ireland et al., 2011).

The Process of Research

21
