## REAL ESTATE FINANCE

283

The historic statistical analysis has suggested that one out of every 39 consumers with a score from 660-679 (considered a fair or acceptable score for many loan programs) will become 90 days or more late on a loan. A score of 700 or higher is considered a very good score and will generally qualify a consumer/borrower for most loan programs. The general benchmarks used by lenders for credit scores are 620,650 and 680 . A credit score of less than 650 issued to a borrower will likely result in a higher interest rate. Conversely, a credit score in excess of 680 will likely result in a preferential lower interest rate.

Freddie Mac offers an automated loan-underwriting program called Loan Prospector (LP). It operates in a similar manner to the Fannie Mae automated underwriting system and relies, as well, on credit scores generated from each of the three national repositories of credit data. Freddie Mac also uses similar credit score benchmarks which are applied in the same manner.

# # Underwriting Income Property

There are different methods of underwriting income property. The methodology is often dependent on the type of loan request and the primary source of repayment. For example, if the loan is secured by a rented or leased fee commercial investment property (such as an apartment building, retail store, or an office building), the lender likely will rely heavily on the security property's cash flow that is available to service the mortgage debt. Since the income from the security property will be the primary source of repayment, the lender will ask to review rental and lease agreements and for lessee estoppel certificates to be obtained.

In the case of an apartment property, the rent roll and the status of the rent on each unit are included in the information required to underwrite the loan. Secondary sources of repayment may come from the borrower's excess cash flow or liquidity (depending on if the loan is recourse or non-recourse). The tertiary source of repayment may come from the sale of the security property. In this method of underwriting, a debt coverage ratio will be established. Generally, the underwriter determines the debt coverage ratio by using the following formula:

<table><tr><td></td><td>Projected Gross Rents</td><td>(Economic or projected gross rent scenarios will be considered)</td></tr><tr><td>Plus</td><td>Other Income</td><td>(e.g., laundry, parking, common area maintenance reimbursements)</td></tr><tr><td>Equals</td><td>Total Gross Income</td><td>(Economic or projected)</td></tr><tr><td>Less</td><td>Vacancy Factor</td><td>(Includes projected vacancies, collection, and credit losses)</td></tr><tr><td>Equals</td><td>Effective Gross</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Less</td><td>Operating Expenses</td><td>(Economic or projected)</td></tr><tr><td>Equals</td><td>Net Operating Income</td><td>(Economic or projected)</td></tr></table>

The projected gross rents estimate the income the security property should generate if rented at economic or the then current market rents. If long-term leases encumber the security property with contract rents that are less than economic or the then current market rents, the market value of the intended security property is burdened by these actual rents. The available income stream upon which to rely for a debt coverage ratio is reduced by the contract rents from the long-term leases. The actual gross income from the contract (actual) rents will correspondingly reduce the available economic or projected net operating income (NOI), i.e., the actual NOI will be less than the economic or projected NOI. The actual NOI will prevail when calculating the debt coverage ratio.

The NOI is the cash flow of the property and the amount available to service the mortgage debt. The debt coverage ratio (DCR) is determined by dividing the annual NOI by the annual mortgage debt service. The debt coverage ratio will vary depending on the loan, property type, and the creditor/lender or the permanent investor. For example, an institutional lender making a loan on an apartment building may require a 1:15:1.0 DCR. This means that for every dollar of debt service,there must be $\$$1.15 of NOI. In a commercial loan transaction where the intended security property is other than an apartment building and the underwriter believes the loan represents a greater risk to the creditor/lender or to the permanent investor, the lender may ask for a 1.25:1.0 DCR.

If the loan is a recourse transaction or there is a third party guarantor, the financials of the borrower and the guarantor will be evaluated to determine their overall financial strength. The objective is to estimate the financial ability to service any shortfalls, should the security property's income stream be interrupted.
