## 2.7

## Instructions for Making Decisions

99

# # Compiling if-then-else into Conditional Branches

In the following code segment, $ f,g,h,i $, and $ j $ are variables. If the five variables $ f $ through $ j $ correspond to the five registers $ \times {19} $ through $ \times {23} $ , what is the compiled RISC-V code for this C *if* statement?

"if (i == j) f = g + h; else f = g - h;"

Figure 2.9 shows a flowchart of what the RISC-V code should do. The first expression compares for equality between two variables in registers. It would seem that we would want to branch if I and $ j $ are equal (beq). In general, the code will be more efficient if we test for the opposite condition to branch over the code that branches if the values are not equal (bne). Here is the code:

"bne x22, x23, Else // go to Else if i $\neq$ j"

The next assignment statement performs a single operation, and if all the operands are allocated to registers, it is just one instruction:

"add x19, x20, x21 // f = g + h (skipped if i ≠ j)"

We now need to go to the end of the*if* statement. This example introduces another kind of branch, often called an *unconditional branch*. This instruction says that the processor always follows the branch. One way to express an unconditional branch in RISC-V is to use a conditional branch whose condition is always true:

"beq x0, x0, Exit // if 0 == 0, go to Exit"

The assignment statement in the else portion of the *if* statement can again be compiled into a single instruction. We just need to append the label EIse to this instruction. We also show the label Exit that is after this instruction, showing the end of the *if-then-else* compiled code:

"Else:sub x19, x20, x21 // f = g - h (skipped if i = j)

Exit:"

Notice that the assembler relieves the compiler and the assembly language programmer from the tedium of calculating addresses for branches, just as it does for calculating data addresses for loads and stores (see Section 2.12).

## EXAMPLE

## ANSWER
