PROOF. We have $ M{M}^{\mathrm{H}} - M{N}^{\mathrm{H}} - N{M}^{\mathrm{H}} + N{N}^{\mathrm{H}} =  \left( {M - N}\right) {\left( M - N\right) }^{\mathrm{H}} \succeq  0 $ and hence, (44) holds. $\square$

The following proposition provides a sufficient condition linear in $ {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} $ which, ensures the exploration goal (4).

**Proposition 13** Let Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Suppose the matrices $ {\bar{\Phi }}_{\mathrm{u}},{\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} $ and $ \hat{Z} \in {\mathbb{C}}^{\left( {{n}_{\phi } + {n}_{\mathrm{x}}{n}_{\phi }^{2}}\right) \times L{n}_{\mathrm{x}}{n}_{\phi }} $ satisfy

$$
$$\left\lbrack  \begin{matrix} \left( {\left( {1 - \epsilon }\right) {\bar{\Phi }}_{\mathrm{u}}{\bar{\Phi }}_{\mathrm{u}}^{\mathrm{H}} - \left( \frac{1 - \epsilon }{\epsilon }\right) {\bar{W}}_{\phi }}\right)  - \frac{{\gamma }_{\mathrm{w}}}{T}{D}_{\mathrm{des }} & 0 \\  0 & 0 \end{matrix}\right\rbrack$$
$$

$$
$$+ \left( (1 - \epsilon) \left( \bar{Z}_\mathrm u \hat{Z}^\mathsf{H} + \hat{Z} \bar{Z}_\mathrm u^\mathsf{H}  - \hat{Z} \hat{Z}^\mathsf{H}  \right) - \left( \frac{1 - \epsilon}{\epsilon} \right) \bar{W}_Z \right) \succeq 0,\tag{45}$$
$$

then an estimate $ {\widehat{\theta }}_{T} $ computed as in (11) satisfies the exploration goal (4).

PROOF. From Lemma 12, we have

$$
$${\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}}{\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}}^{\mathsf{H}} \succeq  {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}}{\hat{Z}}^{\mathsf{H}} + \hat{Z}{\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}}^{\mathsf{H}} - \hat{Z}{\hat{Z}}^{\mathsf{H}}. \tag{46}$$
$$

Inserting Inequality (46) in Inequality (45), and multiplying the resulting inequality by $ T $ yields Inequality (42). Hence, if there exists matrices $ {\bar{\Phi }}_{\mathrm{u}},{\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} $ and $ \hat{Z} $ that satisfy (45), then the condition in Proposition 11 is satisfied and the exploration goal (4) is achieved.   $\square$

The bound derived in Lemma 12 is tight if $ \hat{Z} = {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} $ . Since $ {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} $ comprises uncertain elements $ {V}_{\mathrm{x},\mathrm{{tr}}},{V}_{\phi ,\mathrm{{tr}}} $ and the unknown decision variable $ {U}_{\mathrm{e}} $ , we consider a candidate $ \hat{Z} $. Later, this relaxation is embedded an iterative process to reduce conservatism. In what follows, we utilize Inequality (45) to derive a condition linear in the decision variable $ {U}_{\mathrm{e}} $that ensures the exploration goal (4).

# ### 4.6 Exploration SDP

In this section, we provide a sufficient condition that ensure the exploration goal (4) using Proposition 13. In (33), $ {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} $ can be be written as $ {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u}} = {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u},1} + {\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u},2} $ , where

$$
$${\bar{Z}}_{\mathrm{u},1} = \left\lbrack  \begin{array}{cc} {D}_{\mathrm{{des}}}^{\frac{1}{2}\top }\left( {{\mathbf{1}}_{L}^{\top }{U}_{\mathrm{e}}^{\top } \otimes  {I}_{{n}_{\phi }}}\right) \\  0 \end{array}\right\rbrack  \left( {{V}_{\mathrm{x},\mathrm{{tr}}}^{\mathsf{H}} \otimes  {I}_{{n}_{\phi }}}\right) ,$$
$$

$$
$$\bar{Z}_{u,2} = \left[\begin{array}{cc}
0 \\
(V_{\phi,\mathrm{tr}} \otimes I_{n_\times n_\phi})
\end{array} \right](U_e \otimes I_{n_\times n_\phi}). \tag{47}$$
$$

In order to robustly account for uncertainties in Inequality (45), we split Inequality (45) into three inequalities

that are handled separately. The following inequalities are equivalent to Inequality (45) if $ {\bar{D}}_{1} + {\bar{D}}_{2} + {\bar{D}}_{3} \succeq 0 $:

$$
$$(1 - \epsilon) \left( \bar{Z}_{u,1} \hat{Z}^H + \hat{Z} \bar{Z}_{u,1}^H \right) - \bar{D}_1 \succeq 0, \tag{48a}$$
$$

$$
$$(1 - \epsilon) \left( \bar{Z}_{u,2} \hat{Z}^\mathsf{H}  + \hat{Z} \bar{Z}_{u,2}^\mathsf{H}  - \hat{Z} \hat{Z}^\mathsf{H}  \right) - \left( \frac{1 - \epsilon}{\epsilon} \right) \bar{W}_Z - \bar{D}_2 \succeq 0, \tag{48b}$$
$$

$$
$$\left[\begin{array}{cc}
((1 - \epsilon) \bar{\Phi}_\mathrm{u} \bar{\Phi}_\mathrm{u}^\mathsf{H}  - \left( \frac{1 - \epsilon}{\epsilon} \right) \bar{W}_\phi) - \frac{\gamma_w}{T} D_{\mathrm{des}} & 0 \\
0 & 0
\end{array}\right] - \bar{D}_3 \succeq 0. \tag{48c}$$
$$

The following theorem provides a sufficient condition linear in $ {U}_{\mathrm{e}} $ which ensures the exploration goal (4).

Theorem 14 Let Assumptions 1, 2, 4 and 8 hold. Suppose there exist matrices $ {U}_{\mathrm{e}},{\bar{D}}_{1},{\bar{D}}_{2} $ and $ {\bar{D}}_{3} $, and scalars $ {\tau }_{1} \geq 0,{\tau }_{2} \geq 0 $ , and $ {\tau }_{3} \geq 0 $ such that

$$
$$S_{\mathrm{exp}-1}(\epsilon, \tau_1, U_e, \hat{Z}, \hat{V}_x, \tilde{\Gamma}_x, D_{\mathrm{des}}, \bar{D}_1) \succeq 0,$$
$$

$$
$$S_{\mathrm{exp}-2}(\epsilon, \tau_2, U_e, \hat{Z}, \bar{W}_Z, \hat{V}_\phi, \tilde{\Gamma}_\phi, D_{\mathrm{des}}, \bar{D}_2) \succeq 0,$$
$$

$$
$$S_{\mathrm{exp}-3}(\epsilon, \tau_3, U_e, \hat{U}, \bar{W}_\phi, \hat{V}_\phi, \tilde{\Gamma}_\phi, \gamma_w, D_{\mathrm{des}}, \bar{D}_3) \succeq 0,$$
$$

$$
$$\bar{D}_1 + \bar{D}_2 + \bar{D}_3 \succeq 0. \tag{50}$$
$$

where $ {S}_{\text{exp- }1},{S}_{\text{exp- }2} $, and $ {S}_{\text{exp- }3} $ are defined in (49a), (49b) and (49c), respectively. Then, an estimate $ {\hat{\theta }}_{T} $computed as in (11) upon the application of the input (6) satisfies the exploration goal (4).

The proof of Theorem 14 is provided in Appendix C. The key idea of the proof is the application of robust control tools, in particular, the matrix S-lemma [5, 27], to account for parametric uncertainty. Consequently, we can pose the exploration problem of designing exploration inputs that excite the system with minimal energy to obtain an estimate $ {\hat{\theta }}_{T} $ that satisfies (4) using the following SDP:

$$
$$\inf_{\substack{U_e, \gamma_e, \\ \tau_1 \geq 0, \tau_2 \geq 0, \\ \tau_3 \geq 0}}\quad\gamma_e$$
$$

s.t. $\quad S_{\mathrm{energy-bound}}(\gamma_e, U_e) \succeq 0$

$$
$$S_{\mathrm{exp}-1}(\epsilon, \tau_1, U_e, \hat{Z}, \hat{V}_x, \tilde{\Gamma}_x, D_{\mathrm{des}}, \bar{D}_1) \succeq 0$$
$$

$$
$$S_{\mathrm{exp}-2}(\epsilon, \tau_2, U_e, \hat{Z}, \bar{W}_Z, \hat{V}_\phi, \tilde{\Gamma}_\phi, D_{\mathrm{des}}, \bar{D}_2) \succeq 0$$
$$

$$
$$S_{\mathrm{exp}-3}(\epsilon, \tau_3, U_e, \hat{U}, \bar{W}_\phi, \hat{V}_\phi, \tilde{\Gamma}_\phi, \gamma_w, D_{\mathrm{des}}, \bar{D}_3) \succeq 0$$
$$

$$
$$\bar{D}_1 + \bar{D}_2 + \bar{D}_3 \succeq 0. \tag{51}$$
$$

A solution of (51) gives us the parameters required for the implementation of the exploration input, i.e.,

7
