## Xiong et al. BMC Infectious Diseases

## (2024) 24:1078

Page 5 of 8

Table 1 Initial values under several strategies. The scenario (i) corresponds to non-vaccination. The scenario (ii) represents that vaccination has been completed before the pandemic, in accordance with the current New York City policy on the distribution of vaccines for different age groups. The scenario (iii) represents that vaccination was completed prior to the outbreak based on sensitivity analysis. For comparison, the size of vaccinations in scenario (ii) and scenario (iii) is the same

<table><tr><td>Scenario (i)</td><td>Scenario (ii)</td><td>Scenario (iii)</td></tr><tr><td>$S_{1}^{h}=16,000$</td><td>$S_{1}^{h}=6254$</td><td>$S_{1}^{h}=8616$</td></tr><tr><td>$\tilde {V}_{1}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{1}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{1}^{h}=0$</td></tr><tr><td>$\bar{V}^{h}_1=0$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{1}^{h}=9746$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{1}^{h}=7384$</td></tr><tr><td>$S_{2}^{h}=45,953$</td><td>$S_{2}^{h}=6160$</td><td>$S_{2}^{h}=0$</td></tr><tr><td>$\tilde {V}_{2}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{2}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{2}^{h}=0$</td></tr><tr><td>$\bar {V}_{2}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{2}^{h}=39,793$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{2}^{h}=45,953$</td></tr><tr><td>$S_{3}^{h}=30,047$</td><td>$S_{3}^{h}=5237$</td><td>$S_{3}^{h}=0$</td></tr><tr><td>$\tilde {V}_{3}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{3}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{3}^{h}=0$</td></tr><tr><td>$\bar {V}_{3}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{3}^{h}=24,810$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{3}^{h}=30,047$</td></tr><tr><td>$S_{4}^{h}=1820$</td><td>$S_{4}^{h}=1820$</td><td>$S_{4}^{h}=1820$</td></tr><tr><td>$\tilde {V}_{4}^{h}=16,380$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{4}^{h}=3872$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{4}^{h}=0$</td></tr><tr><td>$\bar {V}_{4}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{4}^{h}=12,508$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{4}^{h}=16,380$</td></tr><tr><td>$S_{5}^{h}=1680$</td><td>$S_{5}^{h}=1680$</td><td>$S_{5}^{h}=1680$</td></tr><tr><td>$\tilde {V}_{5}^{h}=15,120$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{5}^{h}=5677$</td><td>$\tilde {V}_{5}^{h}=15,120$</td></tr><tr><td>$\bar {V}_{5}^{h}=0$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{5}^{h}=9443$</td><td>$\bar {V}_{5}^{h}=0$</td></tr></table>

the transmissibility of mpox when combined with prevention and control interventions (vaccination, isolation, etc.). Effective reproduction numbers in New York City are calculated based on the parameters obtained by fitting, and the results shows that mpox would not break out in the general population. In particular, our results also indicate that this mpox outbreak in New York City may be caused by Pride Festival, which has increased the contacts among high-risk population. Additionally, based on the sensitivity analysis results for New York City, we find that prophylactic vaccination is the most effective for high-risk group aged 34-45. The individuals in this age group may have specific risk factors because they are in a relatively optimal physical, psychological, and economic situation, resulting in high levels of sexual activity but have not been vaccinated against smallpox. This recommendation is valid since various age groups respond differently to preventive vaccination in terms of reducing the number of new occurrences. The sensitivity of age groups from high to low is as follows: $ {35} - {44} $ ,(45-54 or $ {25} - {34}),{18} - {24},{64} + $ ,which is obtained from the sensitivity analysis. This result is also reasonable when taking into account physical, economic status and vaccination history. It should be noted that the sensitivity of vaccination rates tends to decrease as the epidemic progresses.

This means that the timing of vaccination is important in reducing mpox transmission. Further, according to the data from New York City, three vaccination scenarios are considered to assess the impact of different strategies on mpox transmission. The first scenario is characterized by the fact that no one is vaccinated during an epidemic. The second scenario features vaccination prior to mpox virus transmission based on the current vaccination schedule in New York City (see Table $S2$ or Figure $S4$ in Supplementary Appendix). The third scenario is characterized by prophylactic vaccination based on the results of a sensitivity analysis. Therefore, we conclude that prophylactic vaccination in high-risk population in increasing order of priority forage groups 35-44,45-54,25-34,18-24, $ { 6 4 + }$ is an effective strategy. In addition, based on the fact that mpox virus evolves slowly, the results of Scenario 2 show that New York City will not have a mpox epidemic on the scale of 2022 in recent years, even if another Pride festival-like event is held.

We have investigated the impact of vaccination strategies on the spread of mpox virus. In fact, reducing the transmission rate is also a way to control mpox epidemic. We simulated the total number of new cases by reducing the transmission rate of each age group to explore which age group in the high-risk population has the most effective transmission rate for disease control. Numerical results show that the effect of reducing the transmission rate of 45-55 years old is the most effective (see Fig. 5).

# # Conclusions

The mpox outbreak in New York City may be linked to the Pride event. However, with current vaccine coverage, there will be no more large-scale outbreaks of mpox, even if there is another similar activity. For areas with limited vaccines, priority is given to high-risk groups in the age group 34-45 years as soon as possible.
