## DIFFERENTIABLE GROUPOID OBJECTS

41

Spelling out the actions $ {\beta }_{{T}^{n}E} $ and $ {\beta }_{{T}^{n}F} $ as given in (4.12), we get that the inner square is the outer rectangle of the following diagram

which commutes since $ \Phi $ is $ G $-equivariant and $ {T}^{n} $ is a functor.

The left and right trapezoids are both the commutative diagram (5.2). The bottom trapezoid commutes since $ {i}_{{V}^{\left\lbrack n\right\rbrack }E} $ and $ {i}_{{V}^{\left\lbrack n\right\rbrack }F} $ are projections onto the first factor and since $ {V}^{\left\lbrack n\right\rbrack }\Phi $ is, by definition, $ {T}^{n}\Phi $ on the first factor. The commutativity of the top trapezoid follows from the commutativity of the bottom trapezoid and the functoriality of the pullback along the zero sections. Explicitly,

$$
$$( {{T}^{n}\Phi { \times  }_{{T}^{n}{G}_{0}}\mathrm{{id}}})  \circ  ( {{i}_{{V}^{\left\lbrack  n\right\rbrack  }E}{ \times  }_{{0}_{{G}_{0}}^{\left\lbrack  n\right\rbrack  }}{0}_{{G}_{1}}^{\left\lbrack  n\right\rbrack  }})  = ( {{T}^{n}\Phi  \circ  {i}_{{V}^{\left\lbrack  n\right\rbrack  }E}}) { \times  }_{{0}_{{G}_{0}}^{\left\lbrack  n\right\rbrack  }}( {\mathrm{{id}} \circ  {0}_{{G}_{1}}^{\left\lbrack  n\right\rbrack  }})$$
$$

$$
$$=(i_{V^{[n]}F}\circ V^{[n]}\Phi)\times_{0_{G_{0}}^{[n]}}
(0_{G_{1}}^{[n]}\circ\text{id})
\tag{5.5}$$
$$

$$
$$=(i_{V^{[n]}F}\times_{0_{G_{0}}^{[n]}}0_{G_{1}}^{[n]})\circ(V^{[n]}\Phi\times_{G_{0}}\text{id}).$$
$$

The morphism $ {i}_{{V}^{\left\lbrack n\right\rbrack }F} $ is a monomorphism, as was shown in the proof of Proposition 5.1. It follows from Lemma A.9 (i) that the outer square commutes, which is the condition of equivariance. $\square$

Proposition 5.5. Let $ E \rightarrow {G}_{0} $ and $ F \rightarrow {G}_{0} $ be$ G $-bundles and $ \Phi : E \rightarrow F $ a $G$-equivariant bundle morphism. If $ E $ and $ F $ are differentiable, then the morphism

$$
$${V}_{m}\Phi  \mathrel{\text{:=}} \underset{m\text{ factors }}{\underbrace{{V\Phi }{ \times  }_{\Phi }\ldots { \times  }_{\Phi }{V\Phi }}} : {V}_{m}E \rightarrow  {V}_{m}F, \tag{5.6}$$
$$

is a $ G $-equivariant bundle morphism, where we write $ {V\Phi } \equiv {V}^{\left\lbrack 1\right\rbrack }\Phi $ .

Proof. Firstly, consider the following diagram:

The right square commutes by the naturality of $ \pi $ . The left square is the commutative bottom trapezoid of Diagram (5.4) with $ {i}_{VE} \equiv {i}_{{V}^{\left\lbrack 1\right\rbrack }E} $ . Using (4.20), we conclude that the map (5.6) is well-defined. The rest of the proof is analogous to the proof of Proposition 5.4. $\square$
