## The Rim of the Wheel

# ## The Weight of Cavalry

Downward-stroke hacking, slashing and crushing weapons gain a +1D advantage to their weapon skill due to their extra momentum and follow-through capability while mounted.

# ## The Curved Blade

Swords built with curving blades maximize the height and full swing advantage granted by being mounted. Characters wielding a saber, scimitar or katana gain a +2D bonus to their weapon skill while mounted.

# ## Spears

Spears are held over the shoulder and thrust into the target as the mount passes by at speed. The first Strike or Great Strike of an engagement gains +1D to skill, +1 Power and a +1 VA bonus. However, spears used in this manner to achieve this bonus are "dropped" after the Strike. They should rightly be lodged in your opponent's chest as you ride past!

# ## It's Good to be King!

Attacks from horseback are directed at the head, shoulders, chest and arms of opponents on the ground. The legs cannot be chosen by the target as an available location against a mounted adversary. Choose arms, torso or head.

# ## Beating the Horse and Horseman

A beast and rider count as one target for purposes of hit location with melee weapons. The rider may declare himself or his steed as the area to be hit—and he may specify

which location. It costs the attacker one success to move from rider to mount. Moving a blow to the head of a mounted rider costs two successes. Moving a blow along the length of the mount costs two successes (from head to haunches, for example).

Edward Ze (Order #44483214)

## Riding and Mounted Comba

535
