# Interview with Vladislav Kreynin.

Vladislav Kreynin Senior Vice President and Director of the Marketing and Communications Department, Sber

# How has Sber managed to maintain its leading position in terms of both value and brand strength for so many years?

Over a year ago, we rebrandedas Sber. We are constantly improving and developing. Sber is not only the largest bank in Russia and in Central and Eastern Europe today, but we are also the top technology company in Russia and a leader behind the digitalisation of the national economy.While relying on an impressive consumer base of 104million, Sber is aiming todiversifyfurther into a new demographic of Gen Z userswitha new digitalservicesoffering. Thenumber of SberBank Online users exceeded 73 million in December 2021.

Sber'secosystem provides customers with an immense range of digital services for various tasksand in various areas. Clients come to us to open an account, buy shares, insure property, watch movies, listen to music, call a taxi, consult a doctor online, and much, much more.They expect us to provide products driven by the latest trends. It is important to them that the company's products are modern and, at the same time, organic and convenient. This isprecisely thekind ofservices Sber offers. A seamlesscustomer journey and high-quality services-allthese elementsundoubtedly contribute to our excellent reputation and brand awareness among clients.

# Could you tell us more about your achievements in 2021?

In today's world, clients need to be able to benefit from several servicesin one place, in as little time aspossible. The quality of the servicesneedsto be excellent.We work relentlessly to create services thatarerelevantandtry to anticipate our clients' needs so theykeep coming back to us, knowingthatwe canresolve their problems. Through investmentsin logisticsoperations, Sber subscriptions, the SberSpasibo loyalty program, Sber financial services,voice assistants, seamless authentication usingSber ID, we are creatinga unique experiencewhere clients canuseservices from different companies in one ecosystem.

We strive to put Sber's digital competencies at the service of people and society through the implementation and adoption of high-tech health services. Let me start with SberHealth. The company is showing dynamic growth and has over 14 million clients. Approximately 1.5 million telehealth consultation and doctor's appointment services were provided, and clients made over 11 million promptly delivered orders for medication through the SBER EAPTEKA service in2021. Thetop 3 Al-assisted clinical decision supportsystem has helped doctors in Moscow clinicsmake over2 million diagnoses. Overall, we have combined over 50 Al-powered medical models to help medical personnel make diagnoses and decisions on a single platform.

We have also seen greatprogress in foodtech. In 2021, SberMarket took thelead in the food delivery market, overtaking X5 Retail Groupand Vkusvill, with turnover amounting to RUB 14.5 bn, three times higher than in 2020. For thefirst time in December, Delivery Club carried out over 10 million transactions, including grocery delivery, pickup, and cashless tipsleft for wait staff. In a single month,users made 9.8 million orders from restaurant sand stores, 60% more than the previous year.

I think that this data is evidence enough of the progressive development of our ecosystem services. Another indicator of service relevance is the fact that over4.25 million clients have subscribed to SberPrime, which provides discounts on our products.

On top of that, we launched our own smart devices: SberBox Time, a 3-in-1 smart media speaker that is one-of-a-kind in its category and features the Salute virtual assistant family. We presented Russia's all-new high-performance supercomputer Christofari Neo, which enables you to bring computing speeds to the next level, unlocking new opportunities for us to implement breakthrough services and products with cutting-edge technology. Sber also created ruDALL-E, the world's first neural network capable of creating images based on text descriptions in Russian, which can be used for interior

brandirectory.com/global

68

Brand Finance Global 500 2022
